MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2021)

Preprint 28 September 2021

Compiled using MNRAS LATEX style file v3.0

The tidal evolution of dark matter substructure – II. The impact of
artificial disruption on subhalo mass functions and radial profiles
Sheridan B. Green,1★ † Frank C. van den Bosch,1,2 and Fangzhou Jiang3,4 ‡
1 Department of Physics, Yale University, P.O. Box 208120, New Haven, CT 06520-8120
2 Department of Astronomy, Yale University, P.O. Box 208101, New Haven, CT 06520-8101

arXiv:2103.01227v2 [astro-ph.GA] 26 Sep 2021

3 TAPIR, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125
4 Carnegie Observatories, 813 Santa Barbara Street, Pasadena, CA 91101

ABSTRACT

Several recent studies have indicated that artificial subhalo disruption (the spontaneous, non-physical disintegration of a subhalo)
remains prevalent in state-of-the-art dark matter-only cosmological simulations. In order to quantify the impact of disruption
on the inferred subhalo demographics, we augment the semi-analytical SatGen dynamical subhalo evolution model with an
improved treatment of tidal stripping that is calibrated using the DASH database of idealized high-resolution simulations of
subhalo evolution, which are free from artificial disruption. We also develop a model of artificial disruption that reproduces the
statistical properties of disruption in the Bolshoi simulation. Using this framework, we predict subhalo mass functions (SHMFs),
number density profiles, and substructure mass fractions and study how these quantities are impacted by artificial disruption
and mass resolution limits. We find that artificial disruption affects these quantities at the 10 − 20% level, ameliorating previous
concerns that it may suppress the SHMF by as much as a factor of two. We demonstrate that semi-analytical substructure
modeling must include orbit integration in order to properly account for splashback haloes, which make up roughly half of the
subhalo population. We show that the resolution limit of 𝑁-body simulations, rather than artificial disruption, is the primary
cause of the radial bias in subhalo number density found in dark matter-only simulations. Hence, we conclude that the mass
resolution remains the primary limitation of using such simulations to study subhaloes. Our model provides a fast, flexible, and
accurate alternative to studying substructure statistics in the absence of both numerical resolution limits and artificial disruption.
Key words: galaxies: haloes – cosmology: dark matter – methods: numerical

1 INTRODUCTION
The standard Λ cold dark matter (ΛCDM) cosmological model predicts that structure forms as the consequence of primordial dark
matter overdensities that collapse to form self-bound haloes. Smaller
perturbations collapse earlier and merge to form larger haloes, resulting in a hierarchical halo assembly process that spans all mass
scales. By studying halo evolution via cosmological 𝑁-body simulations, it is clear that the tightly bound central regions of smaller
haloes survive the merger process, persisting as orbiting subhaloes
within the treacherous environment of their host halo, where they
are subjected to dynamical friction and disruptive tidal forces (e.g.,
Mo et al. 2010). Neglecting the impact of baryonic physics, this
merger process is roughly self-similar due to the scale-free nature of
gravitational collapse, ultimately resulting in an entire hierarchy of
substructure, where subhaloes themselves host sub-subhaloes, and so
on all the way down (Tormen et al. 1997; Gao et al. 2004; Kravtsov
et al. 2004; Giocoli et al. 2010).
The population statistics of dark matter (DM) substructure are most
★ E-mail: sheridan.green@yale.edu (SBG)

† NSF Graduate Research Fellow
‡ Troesh Scholar
© 2021 The Authors

often summarized in terms of subhalo mass functions (SHMFs) and
radial profiles; these summary statistics depend heavily on the underlying particle nature of DM. For example, the free-streaming cutoff
scale, set by the DM thermal velocity, impacts the low-mass end of
the SHMF (e.g., Knebe et al. 2008; Lovell et al. 2014; Colín et al.
2015; Bose et al. 2017), while non-negligible DM self-interactions
result in cored inner halo density profiles (e.g., Burkert 2000; Vogelsberger et al. 2012; Rocha et al. 2013), which impacts the survivability of substructure in the presence of tides (e.g., Peñarrubia
et al. 2010). The predictions of substructure demographics made by
these various dark matter models differ primarily at the low mass
end. Consequently, many observational searches are underway in the
attempt to constrain the abundance of low mass substructure, leveraging gravitational lensing (e.g., Dalal & Kochanek 2002; Keeton &
Moustakas 2009; Vegetti et al. 2014; Shu et al. 2015; Hezaveh et al.
2016; Gilman et al. 2020; Vattis et al. 2020), indirect detection via
DM annihilation to 𝛾-rays or decay signals (e.g., Strigari et al. 2007;
Pieri et al. 2008; Hayashi et al. 2016; Hiroshima et al. 2018; Delos
2019; Facchinetti et al. 2020; Rico 2020; Somalwar et al. 2021), and
gaps in stellar streams (e.g., Carlberg 2012; Ngan & Carlberg 2014;
Erkal et al. 2016; Bonaca et al. 2020; Necib et al. 2020), among other
approaches. Since satellite galaxies are inferred to live within sub-

2

S. B. Green, F. C. van den Bosch, and F. Jiang

haloes, with their respective properties related via the galaxy-halo
connection, DM substructure statistics are intimately connected to
satellite galaxy abundances (e.g., Vale & Ostriker 2006; Hearin et al.
2013; Behroozi et al. 2013; Newton et al. 2018; Nadler et al. 2019,
2020a,b) and thus can be used to constrain cosmology through their
impact on small-scale clustering statistics (e.g., Benson et al. 2001;
Berlind et al. 2003; van den Bosch et al. 2005a; Lange et al. 2019; van
den Bosch et al. 2019). Clearly, accurately modeling the evolution of
DM subhalo populations is a prerequisite for their use as a cosmological probe and as a tool to study the particle nature of dark matter.
Unfortunately, since the evolution of DM substructure is highly nonlinear, modeling all but the most idealized circumstances has proven
analytically intractable. Thus, to date, cosmological 𝑁-body simulations have been the most common avenue used for studying the
demographics of DM substructure.
In recent years, cosmological simulations have successfully and
repeatedly passed an important convergence test: as resolution is
varied, the SHMFs remain in agreement above the 50–100 particle
limit (e.g., Springel et al. 2008; Onions et al. 2012; Knebe et al.
2013; van den Bosch & Jiang 2016; Griffen et al. 2016; Ludlow
et al. 2019). While this is promising, the physical correctness of
cosmological simulations is not guaranteed by the convergence of
mass functions alone. Using the state-of-the-art Bolshoi simulation
(Klypin et al. 2011), van den Bosch (2017) found that the evolved
SHMF of surviving subhaloes looks identical to the SHMF of disintegrated subhaloes, noting that total subhalo disruption is prevalent.
The inferred disruption rates from various studies are extremely high,
with roughly 55-65% (90%) of subhaloes accreted at 𝑧 = 1 (2) being
disrupted by the present day (Han et al. 2016; van den Bosch 2017;
Jiang & van den Bosch 2017). Hayashi et al. (2003) has shown that
the total binding energy of a halo that is instantaneously stripped
down to a sufficiently small radius (encompassing roughly 5–10% of
the original mass) can be positive; hence, the authors suggested that
such systems could disrupt spontaneously. Motivated by this analysis, subsequent works have incorporated physical disruption via tidal
stripping and heating into their models or used such an argument
as a justification for their results (Zentner & Bullock 2003; Taylor
& Babul 2004; Klypin et al. 2015; Garrison-Kimmel et al. 2017).
Recently, however, van den Bosch et al. (2018) demonstrated that the
boundedness of a subhalo remnant does not depend solely on the total binding energy, but rather on the radial distribution of the binding
energies of the constituent particles. In fact, by using idealized simulations with sufficiently high resolution, van den Bosch et al. (2018)
showed that it is possible for a self-bound remnant to survive even
after 99.9% of the original mass has been stripped. More broadly,
the study used analytical arguments to show that neither tidal heating
nor tidal stripping alone are capable of causing complete physical
disruption of cuspy CDM subhaloes (consistent with earlier work
by Peñarrubia et al. 2010). As a follow-up, van den Bosch & Ogiya
(2018) ran a suite of idealized numerical simulations, concluding
that disruption of 𝑁-body subhaloes in cosmological simulations is
largely numerical in nature and can be primarily attributed to (i) discreteness noise caused by insufficient particle resolution and (ii) inadequate softening of gravitational forces (see Mansfield & Avestruz
2020 for a recent analysis of the impact of the force softening scale on
various halo properties). In agreement with these findings, van den
Bosch (2017) assessed that approximately 80% of subhalo disruption in the Bolshoi simulation is most likely numerical in nature (see
Section 2.4 below for details).
If the majority of subhalo disruption in cosmological simulations is
indeed numerical, the implications for small-scale cosmology and astrophysics are profound. For example, a disruption-driven reduction
MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2021)

in subhalo statistics would result in systematic biases in predictions
from subhalo abundance matching (e.g., Conroy et al. 2006; Vale &
Ostriker 2006; Guo et al. 2010; Hearin et al. 2013; Chaves-Montero
et al. 2016). Semi-analytical models of galaxy and dark matter substructure evolution (e.g., Taylor & Babul 2001; Peñarrubia & Benson 2005; Zentner et al. 2005; Diemand et al. 2007; Kampakoglou
& Benson 2007; Gan et al. 2010; Pullen et al. 2014; Jiang & van
den Bosch 2016; Benson 2020; Jiang et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2020)
have historically been calibrated to reproduce the results of cosmological simulations and thus end up having inherited any systematic
issues present in such simulations. As a specific example, Jiang &
van den Bosch (2016) constructed a semi-analytical model that accurately matches the statistics of subhaloes in the Bolshoi simulation
by simply tuning an orbit-averaged mass-loss rate and including an
empirical model of subhalo disruption that, by construction, reproduces the disruption demographics in the simulation. As shown in
Green & van den Bosch (2019, hereafter GB19), in the absence of
such disruption, the normalization of the evolved SHMF predictions
from Jiang & van den Bosch (2016) is boosted by a factor of two.
Hence, depending on the fraction of subhalo disruption in cosmological simulations that is indeed artificial, it remains possible that
such simulations (and derivative semi-analytical models) may be underestimating subhalo abundances by up to a factor of two. Such a
systematic bias would have serious implications for dark matter indirect detection searches and could help explain the ‘galaxy clustering
crisis’ in subhalo abundance matching (Campbell et al. 2018), since
both of these applications, among others, depend heavily on evolved
SHMFs from simulations. As long as the effects of artificial disruption remain as an unknown variable in the analysis of cosmological
simulations, we will be unable to extract the maximum amount of
cosmological and astrophysical information content that will soon be
made available in various large upcoming surveys, including DESI,
LSST, EUCLID, and WFIRST. Clearly, there is still work to be done
towards better understanding the tidal evolution of DM substructure,
hence the motivation of the present study.
Recently, we released SatGen (Jiang et al. 2021), a semi-analytical
modeling framework for studying galaxy and DM substructure evolution. The core components of the dark matter-only side of the
framework include prescriptions for (i) analytical merger trees (Cole
et al. 2000; Parkinson et al. 2008; Benson 2017), from which the
internal properties of subhaloes at accretion are derived, (ii) orbital
parameter distributions for infalling subhaloes (Zentner et al. 2005;
Wetzel 2011; Jiang et al. 2015; Li et al. 2020), (iii) the integration of
subhalo orbits, including dynamical friction (Chandrasekhar 1943),
(iv) the evolved subhalo density profile, which captures how the internal structure of the subhalo responds to tidal heating and stripping
(e.g., Hayashi et al. 2003; Peñarrubia et al. 2010; Drakos et al. 2017;
Green & van den Bosch 2019; Errani & Navarro 2020), and (v) the
instantaneous mass-loss rate, which depends on the structure of both
the host- and subhalo in addition to the orbit (e.g., Drakos et al.
2020, this work). In contrast to Jiang & van den Bosch (2016), which
followed van den Bosch et al. (2005b) by only considering orbitaveraged subhalo evolution, SatGen integrates individual subhalo
orbits, thereby allowing for a proper treatment of splashback haloes
(e.g., Ludlow et al. 2009; Aung et al. 2021; Diemer 2020a,b; Fong
& Han 2020). As we will show, this treatment of splashback haloes
is crucial for properly comparing model predictions with simulation
results.
The goal of this work is to build a semi-analytical model of substructure evolution that is independent of any tidal evolution-related
numerical artifacts that may be present in cosmological simulations.
Thus, in Ogiya et al. (2019), we introduced the Dynamical Aspects

The impact of artificial disruption
of SubHaloes (DASH) database, a large library of idealized, highresolution 𝑁-body simulations of the tidal evolution of individual
subhaloes. This simulation library has two key strengths: (i) the simulations span a wide range of parameter space, varying the initial
orbital parameters and host- and subhalo concentrations and (ii) the
live 𝑁-body subhaloes satisfy the strict set of convergence criteria
laid out in van den Bosch & Ogiya (2018), suppressing numerical
artifacts caused by discreteness noise and inadequate force softening. In GB19, we used DASH to calibrate a highly accurate, simply
parametrized empirical model of the evolved subhalo density profile
(ESHDP), which is unimpeded by numerical artifacts and is applicable to a far wider range of subhalo parameter space than that of
previous works (Hayashi et al. 2003; Peñarrubia et al. 2010; Drakos
et al. 2017). In this work, we use the results of GB19 as a component in a simple, physically motivated model of the instantaneous
mass-loss rate. After calibrating this model to faithfully reproduce
the subhalo mass trajectories across the range of DASH simulations,
we incorporate it into SatGen, yielding the aforementioned artifactfree semi-analytical model. We use this tool to make predictions
for evolved subhalo mass functions, radial profiles, and substructure
mass fractions and compare these findings to Bolshoi as an independent attempt to quantify the impact of artificial disruption on the
abundance of dark matter subhaloes in cosmological simulations.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe
our methods, giving an overview of SatGen and our modifications,
which include the incorporation of the Li et al. (2020) orbital parameter model (summarized in Appendix A), the ESHDP model of
GB19, and an improved, DASH-calibrated mass-loss rate. We also
detail our procedures for modeling the impact of artificial disruption and calibrating the dynamical friction strength. In Section 3,
we present the results of our augmented SatGen model, focusing
on SHMFs, radial profiles, substructure mass fractions, and the numerical disruption rate in simulations. We conclude in Section 4 by
summarizing our research program, highlighting the updates made
to SatGen, and discussing our findings and their implications.
The cosmology used throughout this work is consistent with that
of the Bolshoi simulation (Klypin et al. 2011): Ωm = 0.270, ΩΛ =
0.730, Ωb = 0.0469, ℎ = 0.7, 𝜎8 = 0.82, and 𝑛s = 0.985. The halo
mass is defined as the mass enclosed within the virial radius, 𝑟 vir ,
inside of which the mean density is equal to Δvir (𝑧) times the critical
density. For the ΛCDM cosmology adopted in this work, Δvir (𝑧 =
0) ≈ 100 and is otherwise well-described by the fitting formula
presented by Bryan & Norman (1998). Throughout, we use 𝑚 and 𝑀
to denote subhalo and host halo masses, respectively. We use 𝑙 and 𝑟 to
reference subhalo- and host halo-centric radii, respectively. Projected
radii are indicated by upper-case letters. The base-10 logarithm is
denoted by log and the natural logarithm is denoted by ln.

3

2.1 Merger trees
Given an input that includes host halo virial mass, 𝑀0 , redshift of
observation, 𝑧 0 , and underlying cosmology, SatGen generates a userdefined number of halo merger trees that specify the subhalo masses
and redshifts at which they are accreted by the main progenitor of
each halo. Merger trees are constructed using the method of Parkinson et al. (2008), which is a modified version of the GALFORM ‘binary
method with accretion’ introduced by Cole et al. (2000). As demonstrated in Jiang & van den Bosch (2014) and van den Bosch et al.
(2014), this method yields results that are in excellent agreement with
numerical simulations.1 As detailed in Jiang et al. (2021), we use the
Parkinson et al. (2008) method with the updated set of parameters
advocated for by Benson (2017) that are applicable to the Bryan &
Norman (1998) virial halo mass definition. Each merger tree is characterized by a minimum progenitor mass, 𝑀res , which we set to be a
fixed fraction, 𝜓res , of the final host halo mass, i.e., 𝑀res = 𝜓res 𝑀0 .
The value of 𝜓res used varies depending on the application and is
specified accordingly. Following Parkinson et al. (2008), the merger
tree is sampled using small time steps of Δ𝑧 ≈ 10−3 ; however, in order to reduce memory usage, the tree is subsequently down-sampled
to a temporal resolution of Δ𝑡 = min[0.1𝑡 dyn (𝑧), 0.06 Gyr], where
√︁
𝑡 dyn (𝑧) = 3𝜋/[16𝐺Δvir (𝑧) 𝜌c (𝑧)] is the redshift-dependent halo
dynamical time (see Jiang & van den Bosch 2016). The maximum
time step of 0.06 Gyr is motivated by convergence tests ran during
the calibration of our subhalo mass-loss model, which we discuss in
Section 2.3.2.
Both host haloes and subhaloes at accretion are assumed to follow
a Navarro-Frenk-White density profile (hereafter NFW; Navarro et al.
1997) with a concentration parameter, 𝑐 vir ,2 that depends on mass
and redshift (or time) according to the model introduced by Zhao
et al. (2009):
"
 8.4 # 1/8

𝑡
.
(1)
𝑐 vir (𝑀vir , 𝑡) = 4.0 1 +
3.75𝑡 0.04
Thus, the concentration of the halo at a proper time, 𝑡, is determined
based on the time at which its main progenitor has accumulated a
mass of 0.04𝑀vir (𝑡), denoted 𝑡0.04 . Each branch of the merger tree
has its own virial mass accretion history, 𝑀vir (𝑡), that tracks the halo
from the time that it attains a mass of 0.04𝑀res = 0.04𝜓res 𝑀0 until
the time that it merges into a more massive halo. Note that in order
to have well-defined concentrations for all progenitor haloes down to
a ‘leaf mass’ of 𝑀res , we track the main progenitor branch of each
leaf further back in time down to 0.04𝑀res .
SatGen tracks subhaloes of all orders. The main branch, which
follows the main progenitor of the 𝑧 = 𝑧 0 host halo back in time, is
considered to be order-0. Subhaloes that are directly accreted onto
the main host are order-1. These subhaloes themselves can host subsubhaloes, which are order-2, and so on. We use an inclusive mass
definition in our merger trees, which means that the summed mass
of all order-𝑘 subhaloes is included in the mass of their order-(𝑘 − 1)
host. In some of our results (e.g., the SHMFs), we consider subhaloes

2 METHODS
Our work builds on the original SatGen model that is presented
in Jiang et al. (2021); we refer the reader to that paper for any
additional model details that are omitted below. In what follows, we
highlight the salient features of SatGen and discuss in greater detail
the new modifications that we make as part of this study. Fig. 1
presents a schematic flowchart that summarizes all of the individual
components of our framework.

1

As an aside, we acknowledge that several components of the model, including the analytical merger tree algorithm and the orbital parameter distribution
model, are still calibrated to agree with cosmological simulations. However,
the calibration of these components only depend on properties of unevolved
subhaloes (i.e., prior to accretion) and hence are not adversely impacted by
any artifacts that may manifest in their subsequent tidal evolution.
2 We use 𝑐
vir,h and 𝑐vir,s to refer to host- and subhalo concentrations, respectively.
MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2021)

4

S. B. Green, F. C. van den Bosch, and F. Jiang

Given:
Halo of mass 𝑀0
Redshift 𝑧0
Cosmology

Initial orbits (Appendix A):
Sampled via universal orbital
distribution of infalling subhaloes from Li et al. (2020)

Merger trees (Section 2.1):
Generated via Parkinson et al. (2008)
algorithm, updated from Cole et al.
(2000) and re-calibrated by Benson
(2017); halo concentrations via Zhao
et al. (2009)

Orbit integration (Sections 2.2, 2.5):
Subhaloes orbit hierarchically within
evolving host halo potentials, integrated via 4th-order Runge–Kutta
method; dynamical friction according
to Chandrasekhar (1943) prescription,
with 𝒂 DF ∝ 𝛽DF , a corrective factor

Subhalo mass loss (Section 2.3.2):
Instantaneous tidal radius, 𝑙t , computed via King (1962); stripping occurs at rate 𝑚
¤ = −𝛼𝑚(> 𝑙t )/𝑡char (𝑟 ),
with 𝛼 calibrated against the DASH
simulations of Ogiya et al. (2019)

Density profiles (Section 2.3.1):
Haloes initialized as NFW density
profiles and updated via Green & van
den Bosch (2019) transfer function
that accounts for tidal stripping and
heating

Output:
𝑚(𝑧), r(𝑧), and v(𝑧) per subhalo
Evolved SHMF
Radial subhalo abundance
Optional: List of ‘artificially disrupted’ subhaloes (Section 2.4)

Figure 1. A flowchart that summarizes the SatGen framework employed in this study.

of all orders; however, due to the inclusive mass definition, we only
consider order-1 subhaloes for other results (e.g., the substructure
mass fraction).
2.2 Orbit integration
Upon accretion, the initial orbital configuration (i.e., location on the
virial sphere, orientation of the orbital plane, and the initial velocity
vector) of each subhalo is drawn at random using the state-of-theart universal infall model of Li et al. (2020, see Appendix A for
details). Note that this is a significant and important improvement
over the approach taken in the original SatGen paper, where it was
assumed that all subhaloes initially have an orbital energy of 𝐸 orb =
2 /2 + Φ (𝑟 ), where 𝑉
𝑉vir,h
h vir
vir,h and Φh are the instantaneous virial
velocity and potential of the host halo, and a specific orbital angular
momentum of 𝐿 orb = 𝜂𝑟 vir𝑉vir , where 𝜂 ∈ [0, 1] is drawn from a
simple sinusoidal probability distribution, 𝑝(𝜂) = 𝜋 sin(𝜋𝜂)/2.
Subhalo orbits are subsequently integrated according to the evolving potential of the immediate host and a simple prescription for dynamical friction. In particular, subhaloes are treated as point masses
with phase space coordinates that are updated at each time step by
integrating the following equation of motion:
¥𝒓 = −∇Φh + 𝒂 DF .

(2)

The integration is performed using a fourth-order Runge–Kutta
method. Here, 𝒓 is the host-centric position vector of the subhalo
and 𝒂 DF is the acceleration due to dynamical friction (DF). The latter is modeled using the standard approach of Chandrasekhar (1943),
which gives the acceleration as
𝒗
(3)
𝒂 DF = −4𝜋𝐺 2 𝑚 ln Λ𝜌(𝒓)𝐹 (< 𝑣) 3
𝑣
(see Mo et al. 2010). Here, ln Λ = ln(𝑀/𝑚) is the Coulomb logarithm, 𝑀 and 𝑚 are the instantaneous masses of the host and subhalo,
respectively, 𝜌(𝒓) is the host NFW density profile, 𝒗 is the relative
velocity of the subhalo with respect to the host, and 𝐹 (< 𝑣) is the
fraction of local host particles contributing to dynamical friction.
The velocity distribution of the background particles is assumed to
be Maxwellian and isotropic such that
2
2𝑋
𝐹 (< 𝑣rel ) = erf(𝑋) − √ e−𝑋 .
(4)
𝜋
√
Here, 𝑋 ≡ 𝑣rel /( 2𝜎), where 𝜎(𝒓) is the one-dimensional isotropic
velocity dispersion of the host, which we compute using the Jeans

MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2021)

equation for hydrostatic equilibrium in a spherical system (e.g., Binney & Tremaine 2008). We use the orbital velocity of the subhalo for
𝒗 rel , ignoring the spin of the host halo.
Because of its simplicity and ability to produce results in reasonable agreement with simulations, equation (3) has long been the
standard approach for capturing dynamical friction in semi-analytical
models. However, it is based on a number of assumptions (i.e., a point
particle moving in an isotropic, homogeneous background of field
particles) that are clearly not justified when modeling the orbital evolution of dark matter subhaloes. In order to account for these (and
other, see Mo et al. 2010) inherent shortcomings, we multiply 𝒂 DF
by a corrective factor, 𝛽DF , of order unity. We treat 𝛽DF as a free parameter, which allows us to adjust the overall strength of dynamical
friction (see Section 2.5).
2.3 Tidal stripping
As a subhalo orbits its host, it is subjected to tidal stripping and
tidal shock heating. As discussed in detail in van den Bosch et al.
(2018), neither of these processes can be rigorously treated analytically. Consequently, all previous semi-analytical models of subhalo
evolution have calibrated their treatments using cosmological simulations, thereby inheriting any shortcomings present within such
simulations (i.e., artificial disruption). The primary goal of this work
is to build a semi-analytical model of DM substructure evolution that
is calibrated in a way such that its results are not sensitive to such
numerical artifacts. We achieve this by calibrating our model against
DASH, a large suite of idealized, high-resolution 𝑁-body simulations
that track individual, live 𝑁-body subhaloes as they orbit a fixed, analytical host halo potential (Ogiya et al. 2019). Both the host halo and
the initial 𝑁-body subhalo in DASH are modeled as spherical NFW
haloes. DASH consists of 2,253 simulations spanning a wide range of
relevant parameter space, including initial orbital energy and angular
momentum, as well as the concentration parameters of both the hostand subhalo. The library consists of various data products generated
from each simulation, including the phase space coordinates of the
subhalo centre-of-mass, the subhalo radial density profile, 𝜌(𝑙, 𝑡),
and the bound mass fraction, 𝑓bound ≡ 𝑚(𝑡)/𝑚 acc , where 𝑚 acc is the
initial subhalo virial mass (i.e., the subhalo mass at accretion), each
of which are recorded over 301 snapshots of time. Below, we use
these results to calibrate a model that describes the evolution of the
density profiles (Section 2.3.1) and bound masses (Section 2.3.2) of
subhaloes as they orbit their host (note that the former is required for
modeling the latter).

The impact of artificial disruption
2.3.1 The evolved subhalo density profile (ESHDP)
In GB19, we used DASH to calibrate a model that describes how the
internal structure of a subhalo evolves in response to tidal stripping
and heating. In particular, motivated by the work of Hayashi et al.
(2003) and Peñarrubia et al. (2010), GB19 present a ‘transfer function’ that describes the density profile of a tidally stripped subhalo
as a function of its initial density profile and its instantaneous bound
mass fraction, 𝑓bound . Consequently, the density profile of a subhalo
at any time, 𝑡, is given by
𝜌s (𝑙, 𝑡) = 𝐻 (𝑙 | 𝑓bound (𝑡), 𝑐 vir,s ) 𝜌s (𝑙, 𝑡acc ),

(5)

where 𝑐 vir,s is the concentration of the subhalo at accretion and 𝑡 acc
denotes the time of accretion. The DASH-calibrated transfer function
is given by
𝐻 (𝑙 | 𝑓bound , 𝑐 vir,s ) =
1+



𝑙
𝑙s

𝑓te
h

𝑙vir −𝑙te
𝑙vir 𝑙te

i 𝛿 .

(6)

Here, 𝑓te , 𝑙 te , and 𝛿 are all expressed as fitting functions that depend
on both 𝑓bound and 𝑐 vir,s (see equations [6]–[8] and Table 1 of GB19;
note that 𝑙 te ≡ 𝑟 te ), whereas 𝑙 s and 𝑙 vir are the scale radius and
virial radius of the NFW subhalo at accretion.3 The transfer function
describes how the outer density profile of the subhalo steepens from
d ln 𝜌/d ln 𝑙 = −3 (i.e., the outer slope of the initial NFW profile)
to roughly −(5 − 6) as the initial subhalo mass is stripped away.
In addition, the central density of the subhalo is lowered as 𝑓bound
decreases, which is primarily a consequence of re-virialization in
response to mass loss.

2.3.2 Mass-loss rate
A common approach to modeling the combined impact of tidal stripping and heating (e.g., Taffoni et al. 2003; Zentner & Bullock 2003;
Oguri & Lee 2004; Zentner et al. 2005; Pullen et al. 2014), which we
adopt as well, is to assume that over each time step, Δ𝑡, some portion,
Δ𝑚, of the subhalo mass outside of its instantaneous tidal radius, 𝑙 t ,
is stripped away. In particular, we set
Δ𝑚 = −𝛼

Δ𝑡
𝑚(> 𝑙t ) .
𝑡 char

Here, 𝛼 is a fudge factor that controls the stripping efficiency,
√︄
3𝜋
𝑡 char =
16𝐺 𝜌¯ h (𝑟)

(7)

(8)

is the characteristic orbital time of the subhalo (identical to the dynamical time introduced in Section 2.1), with 𝑟 the instantaneous,
host-centric radius of the subhalo and 𝜌¯ h (𝑟) the mean density of the
host halo within 𝑟, and
"
# 1/3
𝑚(< 𝑙t )/𝑀 (< 𝑟)
𝑙t = 𝑟
(9)
Ω2 (𝑡)𝑟 3
2 + 𝐺 𝑀 (<𝑟 ) − ddlnln𝑀
𝑟 𝑟
(King 1962), with Ω(𝑡) = |r × 𝒗|/𝑟 2 the instantaneous angular orbital
velocity of the subhalo. We have also experimented with other definitions of 𝑡 char and 𝑙t but find that this combination, when used in

3

The dependence on 𝑐vir,s went unnoticed in Hayashi et al. (2003) and
Peñarrubia et al. (2010), both of which only studied subhaloes with a single
concentration (𝑐vir,s = 10 and 23.1, respectively).

5

conjunction with equation (7), is able to reproduce the DASH results
most accurately.4
We use the 𝑚(𝑡)/𝑚 acc trajectories from the DASH simulations
to calibrate 𝛼 as follows. Given the data products from a particular DASH simulation, we create interpolators for 𝑟 (𝑡), Ω(𝑡), and
𝑚(𝑡)/𝑚 acc . In order to avoid transient behavior in the simulations
that results from the instantaneous introduction of a subhalo into its
host potential (see Ogiya et al. 2019), we initialize our model based
on the properties of the DASH subhalo at the beginning of its second orbit (i.e., after it has returned to apocentre for the first time).
Given a choice for Δ𝑡 and 𝛼, we evolve 𝑚(𝑡)/𝑚 acc using equation (7),
where we set 𝑚(> 𝑙t ) = 𝑚(𝑡) − 𝑚(< 𝑙t ). Here, 𝑚(< 𝑙t ) is computed
using the ESHDP of equation (5), which depends on the instantaneous value of 𝑚(𝑡)/𝑚 acc and the initial 𝑐 vir,s ,5 and we demand
that Δ𝑚 ≥ 0 such that the subhalo mass decreases monotonically.
For each combination of simulation (indexed by 𝑖) and 𝛼 value, we
compute a cost function, 𝐶 (𝑖|𝛼), which is simply the mean squared
residual in log[𝑚(𝑡 𝑗 )/𝑚 acc ] between our model and DASH averaged
over all 𝑛apo,𝑖 apocentric passages subsequent to the initialization
of our model (indexed by 𝑗). We then determine the total cost for a
given 𝛼 by computing the mean of the 𝐶 (𝑖|𝛼) taken over all of the
DASH simulations, which can be written explicitly as
𝐶 (𝛼) =

𝑛
sim
∑︁
𝑖

𝑛apo,𝑖

sim ∑︁
log2 [𝑚 model,𝑖 (𝑡 𝑗 )/𝑚 DASH,𝑖 (𝑡 𝑗 )]
𝐶 (𝑖|𝛼) ∑︁
=
.
𝑛sim
𝑛sim 𝑛apo,𝑖

𝑛

𝑖

𝑗

(10)
We emphasize that this cost function weighs each simulation equally,
which is motivated by the fact that DASH samples the parameter
space of orbits and halo concentrations according to a cosmological
simulation-inferred joint probability distribution. The cost function
depends somewhat on the time step used to integrate the model
predictions (see equation [7]), but we find that the results converge
with Δ𝑡 = 0.06 Gyr, which we adopt throughout as the maximum
time step for integrating the evolution of the subhalo in SatGen.
We find that 𝐶 (𝛼) is minimized for 𝛼 ≃ 0.6, for which the rootmean-square error in the apocentric mass predictions is 0.097 dex.
In order to look for any secondary parametric dependence that the
optimal 𝛼 may have, we determine the best-fit 𝛼 on a per-simulation
basis, which we denote 𝛼𝑖 . We then look at the correlation between
𝛼𝑖 and the concentrations of the host- and subhalo as well as with the
orbital parameters. We find that 𝛼𝑖 depends strongly on 𝑐 vir,s /𝑐 vir,h .
By binning the simulations by 𝑐 vir,s /𝑐 vir,h and taking the median 𝛼𝑖
in each bin, we find a power-law relation that is well fit by

𝑐
vir,s /𝑐 vir,h −1/3
𝛼 = 0.55
.
(11)
2
This relation captures the fact that subhaloes that are more compact
relative to their host are more resilient to stripping. We adopt this
parametrization of 𝛼 in SatGen, emphasizing that, for typical values
< 30% effect. In
of 𝑐 vir,s /𝑐 vir,h , the concentration-dependence has a ∼
determining 𝛼, we use the instantaneous host 𝑐 vir,h (which evolves
4

The tidal radius is only an approximation of the zero-velocity surface,
which itself is neither spherical nor infinitesimally thin, and different authors
often adopt different definitions. See Read et al. (2006), Tollet et al. (2017),
and van den Bosch et al. (2018) for detailed discussions.
5 This enclosed mass profile is not analytical. Hence, in SatGen, we provide
an interpolator for 𝑚(< 𝑙)/𝑚acc (and 𝜎 (𝑙), the one-dimensional isotropic
velocity dispersion), which is itself a function of 𝑙, 𝑚(𝑡)/𝑚acc , and 𝑐vir,s . We
interpolate over log[𝑚(𝑡)/𝑚acc ] and log(𝑐vir,s ) using cubic B-splines and
patch the surfaces together in log(𝑙)-space linearly.
MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2021)

S. B. Green, F. C. van den Bosch, and F. Jiang

2.3.3 Stripping of higher-order substructure
In addition to the treatment of subhalo mass loss, SatGen also implements a procedure for the splashback release of higher-order subhaloes. Specifically, each time step that an order-𝑘 subhalo lies outside of the tidal radius of its order-(𝑘 − 1) host, it has a probability of
min[𝛼Δ𝑡/𝑡 char (𝑟), 1] of being released from its host and becoming
an order-(𝑘 − 1) subhalo. Here, 𝛼 and 𝑡 char (𝑟) are computed for the
order-(𝑘 − 1) host with respect to its order-(𝑘 − 2) parent, which is responsible for stripping off the order-𝑘 subhalo. In the event of release,
the phase space coordinates of the subhalo with respect to its new,
order-(𝑘 − 2) host are the superposition of its original coordinates
with respect to its old, order-(𝑘 −1) host and those of the old host with
respect to the order-(𝑘 − 2) system. The remaining bound mass of the
original, order-𝑘 subhalo is instantaneously removed from the mass
of its old, order-(𝑘 − 1) parent in order to enforce mass conservation.

MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2021)

0.0

η = 0.1

η = 0.2

η = 0.3

−0.5
−1.0

cvir,h = 5.0
cvir,s = 10.0
xc = 1.0

−1.5

log[m(t)/macc]

as long as the host itself has not yet become a subhalo) whereas the
subhalo 𝑐 vir,s is fixed to its value at infall.
Although it is tempting to compare our best-fit value for 𝛼 to that
of previous semi-analytical models that rely on equation (7), such a
comparison is frustrated by the fact that different studies have used
different forms for 𝑡 char and/or 𝑙 t (see van den Bosch et al. 2018;
Drakos et al. 2020 for detailed discussions). In addition, none of
the previous studies have accounted for the detailed evolution of the
subhalo density profile (as in, e.g., equation [5]), rendering such a
comparison moot. We do emphasize, though, that by calibrating our
model to the idealized DASH simulations, rather than to cosmological
simulations, such as in Zentner et al. (2005) and Pullen et al. (2014),
our calibration is not adversely impacted by potential issues resulting
from artificial disruption.
Fig. 2 compares the 𝑚(𝑡)/𝑚 acc trajectories of several DASH simulations (black lines) to predictions based on our mass-loss model
(red lines). In each case, 𝑐 vir,h = 5, 𝑐 vir,s = 10, and the orbital energy, 𝐸, is that of a circular orbit at the virial radius of the host (i.e.,
𝑥c ≡ 𝑟 c (𝐸)/𝑟 vir = 1, where 𝑟 c (𝐸) is the radius of a circular orbit
with energy 𝐸). Different panels correspond to different values of the
orbital circularity, 𝜂 ≡ 𝐿/𝐿 c (𝐸), as indicated, where 𝐿 is the orbital
angular momentum and 𝐿 c (𝐸) is the angular momentum of a circular orbit with the same orbital energy as that of the subhalo. Clearly,
our model tracks the DASH 𝑚(𝑡)/𝑚 acc curves quite faithfully over
∼5 radial orbital periods. Importantly, the performance of the model
is strong over the full range of 𝜂, spanning from orbits that are close
to radial (𝜂 = 0.1) to those that are close to circular (𝜂 = 0.9), a feat
that has proven difficult for previous semi-analytical models of subhalo mass evolution (cf. Peñarrubia et al. 2010; Drakos et al. 2020).
Although not shown, we emphasize that the model performs comparably for other configurations as well. In particular, the concentration
dependence built into the parametrization of the stripping efficiency
(i.e., equation [11]) considerably improves the predictions made for
systems with 𝑐 vir,s /𝑐 vir,h ratios that deviate significantly from two.
We use the mass-loss model to predict the mass evolution of every
simulated DASH subhalo. In Fig. 3, we plot the time evolution of
the median and standard deviation of the log-residuals between our
model predictions and the DASH mass trajectories. We find that the
mass-loss model performs well over the full parameter space, with
minimal bias and scatter for longer than a Hubble time. After 15
Gyr of evolution, the scatter in the log-residuals of our mass-loss
model reaches only 0.04 dex; hence, the impact of mass evolution
error will be subdominant to the intrinsic halo-to-halo variance in
our quantities of interest.

0.0

η = 0.4

η = 0.5

η = 0.6

η = 0.7

η = 0.8

η = 0.9

−0.5
−1.0
−1.5
0.0
−0.5
−1.0

DASH
This work

−1.5
0

2

4

0

2

4

0

2

4

t/tr
Figure 2. A comparison between our calibrated mass-loss model predictions
and the DASH 𝑚(𝑡)/𝑚acc trajectories of several simulations. The times are
normalized by the radial orbital period, 𝑡r . We fix 𝑐vir,h = 5, 𝑐vir,s = 10, and
𝑥c = 1 (these parameters are typical of systems seen in cosmological simulations; see, e.g., Ogiya et al. 2019), demonstrating that the model performance
is strong over a wide range of circularity values, ranging from highly elliptical
(𝜂 = 0.1) to nearly circular orbits (𝜂 = 0.9).

log(mmodel) − log(mDASH)

6

0.3
0.2

Median
Standard deviation

0.1
0.0

−0.1
−0.2
−0.3
0.0

2.5

5.0

7.5

10.0

12.5

15.0

t since first apocentric passage [Gyr]
Figure 3. The time evolution of the median and standard deviation of the
log-residuals between our mass-loss model predictions and the simulated
mass trajectories taken over the ensemble of DASH simulations. The model
performs well over the full parameter space, with minimal bias and scatter
for longer than a Hubble time.

2.3.4 Resolution limits
As discussed in Section 2.1, SatGen has a merger tree resolution
limit, which sets the smallest subhalo mass at accretion to 𝜓res 𝑀0 .
Such a limit is necessary in order to maintain computational feasibility, as the size of the merger tree grows exponentially with decreasing
𝜓res . However, once accreted, a subhalo is evolved in SatGen for as
long as its mass 𝑚 ≥ 𝜙res 𝑚 acc . Here, 𝜙res is the imposed resolution
limit for the bound mass fraction. Our default is to set 𝜙res = 𝜓res ,
which ensures that the least (most) massive subhaloes are tracked
down to 𝑚 = 𝜙res 𝜓res 𝑀0 (𝑚 = 𝜓res 𝑀0 ). In what follows, both reso-

The impact of artificial disruption

7

lution limits are adjusted depending on the specific topic that is under
investigation.

Bosch (2016), which itself is based on the prescription of Taylor &
Babul (2004). A subhalo is marked as artificially disrupted when its
mass, 𝑚(𝑡), falls below its ‘disruption mass’, given by

2.4 Artificial disruption

𝑚 dis = 𝑚 acc (< 𝑓dis 𝑙 s ) = 𝑚 acc

Recently, van den Bosch et al. (2018) and van den Bosch & Ogiya
(2018) carried out a comprehensive analytical and numerical study
focused on subhalo disruption. Using simple, physical arguments,
the authors demonstrate that the inner remnant of a NFW subhalo
should survive even when tidal shock heating has injected an amount
of energy that is many multiples of the binding energy of the subhalo
and/or tidal stripping has removed more than 99.9% of the initial
subhalo mass. This claim is confirmed using idealized 𝑁-body simulations of subhalo evolution (similar to DASH), with the authors
concluding that the majority of subhalo disruption seen in cosmological simulations is numerical in nature.
Let us use Bolshoi as our example cosmological simulation for
considering the rate of artificial disruption. Van den Bosch (2017)
used the merger trees from Bolshoi to separate subhalo evolution
into several unique channels. Of these channels, the disruption (D)
and withering (W) branches pertain specifically to numerical subhalo disruption. A subhalo in one snapshot that evolves along the D
channel has no descendent at any subsequent snapshot. On the other
hand, a subhalo that evolves along the W channel has a descendent
in the subsequent snapshot that falls below the 50 particle resolution
limit imposed by the author. By studying these branches, van den
Bosch (2017) concludes that artificial disruption (D) occurs at a rate
of 2.4%/Gyr and falling below the mass limit (W) occurs at a rate of
∼10%/Gyr. When combined, the total numerical disruption (W + D)
rate in Bolshoi is roughly 13%/Gyr, resulting in ∼65% of subhaloes
accreted at 𝑧 = 1 being numerically disrupted by the present day,
in good agreement with independent estimates made by Han et al.
(2016) and Jiang & van den Bosch (2017). As long as simulations
have a finite number of particles, the W channel will exist. However,
its significance diminishes as simulation resolution limits move toward smaller halo masses that are below all scales of interest. The D
channel, on the other hand, is more alarming, since it represents subhaloes, often well above the mass limit, that simply disappear from
the merger tree. The 2.4%/Gyr of the D channel translates to roughly
20% of subhaloes accreted at 𝑧 = 1 being (artificially) disrupted by
𝑧 = 0.
In order to assess the overall significance of numerical disruption,
we aim to model both the impact of the W branch in isolation as
well as the impact of both the W and D channels in combination on
the SatGen results. As introduced in Section 2.3.2, the W branch
subhaloes in SatGen are simply those with a final mass that has
fallen below the merger tree resolution limit, 𝜓res 𝑀0 . Although even
SatGen has an imposed resolution limit on how far down in 𝑚/𝑚 acc it
tracks a subhalo, we can nevertheless make reasonable predictions in
the absence of withering by considering all subhaloes with 𝑚/𝑚 acc ≥
𝜙res = 10−5 , which we refer to as the “wither-free” fiducial model.
Whenever withering is considered, the subhalo mass limit is set to
𝜓res 𝑀0 instead.
A key goal of this work is to assess the impact of artificial disruption on the subhalo demographics in cosmological simulations.
We are able to do so by adding a model of artificial disruption into
SatGen and adjusting its strength (if needed) such that the SatGen
predictions (which are inherently free of artificial disruption) reproduce the abundance of subhaloes in a simulation such as Bolshoi.
This feat also requires properly accounting for the mass resolution
limit (withering) of the simulation of interest. We implement a version of the artificial disruption mechanism used in Jiang & van den

𝑓 ( 𝑓dis )
.
𝑓 (𝑐 vir,s )

(12)

Here, 𝑚 acc (< 𝑙) denotes the enclosed NFW mass profile of the subhalo at accretion, and 𝑓 (𝑥) = ln(1 + 𝑥) − 𝑥/(1 + 𝑥). The sensitivity of
haloes to artificial disruption is set by 𝑓dis , which represents the effective radius that a halo can be stripped down to before being disrupted.
Under this prescription, haloes with a larger initial concentration are
more resilient to disruption. This approach to modeling (artificial)
disruption has been employed in previous semi-analytical models
(e.g., Hayashi et al. 2003; Taylor & Babul 2004; Zentner et al. 2005),
with 𝑓dis ranging from 0.1 to 2.0.
Rather than select a fixed value for 𝑓dis , Jiang & van den Bosch
(2016) randomly sampled 𝑓dis for each subhalo from a universal
log-normal distribution. We augment this approach by calibrating
a more general model of 𝑓dis that takes into account a dependence
on 𝑚 acc that we identify in the Bolshoi subhaloes. Using all halo
catalogues from Bolshoi6 with 𝑧 ≥ 0.0148,7 we extract 𝑚 acc , 𝑐 vir,s ,
and 𝑚 dis from all D channel subhaloes from which the 𝑓dis of each
corresponding subhalo is calculated. We find that the distribution of
𝑓dis has minimal dependence on redshift and host halo mass, but has
a strong dependence on 𝑚 acc . As shown in Fig. 4, when binned by
𝑚 acc , the 𝑓dis distribution is roughly log-normal with a log-mean,
𝜇, and log-variance, 𝜎 2 , that increases and decreases, respectively,
with decreasing 𝑚 acc . This indicates that subhaloes that are more
massive at accretion are less likely to undergo artificial disruption.
However, note that this trend in 𝑚 acc -space appears to saturate at the
massive end. Motivated by these findings, we model 𝑓dis (𝑚 acc ) as a
log-normal with
h
 −2 i −1/2
𝜇 = 𝐴 + 𝐵 1 + log(𝑚 acc ) + 𝐶
, and
(13)
2
𝜎 = 𝐷 + 𝐸𝜇 + 𝐹𝜇 .
Using maximum likelihood estimation, we obtain the best-fit parameters of ( 𝐴, 𝐵, 𝐶, 𝐷, 𝐸, 𝐹) = (3.08, −3.26, −8.89, 0.38, −0.51, 0.40).
The corresponding best-fit model is indicated as solid lines in Fig. 4
and captures all of the salient details of the data.
When modeling artificial disruption in SatGen, we randomly draw
a value of 𝑓dis from the log-normal distribution described by equation (13) for each subhalo at accretion. Subsequently, the subhalo
is marked as artificially disrupted once its mass drops below its assigned 𝑚 dis , which is computed using equation (12). By applying
this artificial disruption mechanism, SatGen is able to faithfully reproduce the statistics of the Bolshoi D branch subhaloes. We caution
that this particular treatment of artificial disruption is only applicable to Bolshoi. Readers interested in modeling artificial disruption
in another simulation must first characterize the corresponding 𝑓dis
statistics of the particular simulation.

2.5 Dynamical friction strength
In order to calibrate the overall efficiency of dynamical friction,
which we quantify through the correction factor, 𝛽DF , we seek a
6

Available at http://www.slac.stanford.edu/ behroozi/Bolshoi_Catalogs/
We omit using the several snapshots closer to 𝑧 = 0 in order to avoid contaminating the D branch with instances of snapshot-limited failed phantompatching (see discussion in van den Bosch 2017).

7

MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2021)

8

S. B. Green, F. C. van den Bosch, and F. Jiang
log(macc /[h−1 M ]) ∈

log[macc /M0 ] ∈

1.00

1.5

[−1.5, −1.0]

[10.0, 10.2]

hr/rviri

[11.0, 12.0]

PDF

[−1.0, 0.0]

0.75

[10.2, 11.0]

1.0

This work
vdBosch+16

[−2.0, −1.5]

[9.8, 10.0]

[12.0, 13.0]

0.50

[13.0, 14.0]

0.25

0.5

βDF = 0.50

βDF = 0.75

βDF = 1.00

βDF = 1.50

1.00

−1.0

−0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

log(fdis)

Figure 4. The log( 𝑓dis ) distribution of disrupted Bolshoi subhaloes. Here,
𝑓dis is a proxy for the mass below which a particular subhalo is artificially
disrupted in the simulation (see equation [12]). Each color denotes a different
𝑚acc bin. The points are calculated using all Bolshoi subhaloes that disrupt
at 𝑧 ≥ 0.0148. The solid curves correspond to our model that is fit to the
Bolshoi disruption data (equation [13]). The 𝑓dis are distributed log-normal,
with 𝜇 decreasing (and 𝜎 increasing) as 𝑚acc is increased (up to a saturation
point, above which the distribution remains fixed).

measurement made from cosmological simulations that is both sensitive to dynamical friction and insensitive to any underlying artificial disruption. In van den Bosch et al. (2016), the authors study the
segregation of subhaloes in Bolshoi. They measure the mean hostcentric radius of subhaloes, h𝑟/𝑟 vir i, as a function of their redshift of
accretion, 𝑧 acc .
Plotting h𝑟/𝑟 vir i (averaged over thousands of subhaloes) as a function of 𝑧 acc (see Fig. 7 in van den Bosch et al. 2016) reveals the
< 0.5). Subhaloes accreted at
characteristics of an orbit (for 𝑧 acc ∼
𝑧 acc ∼ 0.1 have just reached pericentre for the first time, while those
that are at their first apocentric passage since accretion typically
were accreted around 𝑧 acc ∼ 0.25. Note that phase mixing, which
is primarily driven by variance in the orbital periods of subhaloes
at infall,8 results in a lack of orbital coherence for subhaloes accreted before 𝑧 acc ∼ 0.5; this is made apparent by the lack of clear
apo- or pericentric passages in h𝑟/𝑟 vir i at high 𝑧 acc . Interestingly,
the h𝑟/𝑟 vir i(𝑧 acc ) curves show a clear dependence on 𝑚 acc /𝑀0 . In
particular, subhaloes with larger 𝑚 acc /𝑀0 reach a smaller apocentric h𝑟/𝑟 vir i at 𝑧 acc ∼ 0.25 than their less massive counterparts (see
Fig. 10 in van den Bosch et al. 2016, which is reproduced as the
dashed lines in Fig. 5). This is a manifestation of dynamical friction,
which allows us to calibrate 𝛽DF as follows.9
We construct a set of ∼45,000 merger trees (with 𝜓res = 10−3 )
with host masses consistent with the ∼9,000 host halo sample used in
van den Bosch et al. (2016) — we augment our sample by generating
five trees per unique host mass. We evolve the subhaloes with SatGen,
repeating the procedure for several values of 𝛽DF covering the range

8

The efficiency of phase mixing is further enhanced by dynamical friction,
which impacts the subhalo orbit differently depending on 𝑚acc , and variance
in the host mass accretion history, which itself affects the evolution of the
subhalo orbit between infall and the present day.
9 Since artificial disruption is rare for subhaloes that were only accreted
recently, this feature is not significantly impacted by artificial disruption.
MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2021)

0.75

hr/rviri

0.0
−1.5

0.50

0.25
0.0

0.2

0.4

zacc

0.6 0.0

0.2

0.4

zacc

0.6

Figure 5. A comparison between the h𝑟 /𝑟vir i − 𝑧acc relation of Bolshoi
subhaloes binned by infall mass relative to 𝑧 = 0 host mass, 𝑚acc /𝑀0 (dashed
curves, reproduced from Fig. 10 in van den Bosch et al. 2016), and analogous
predictions by SatGen (solid curves). Each panel corresponds to a different
value of 𝛽DF (indicated in the bottom-left of each panel), which controls the
strength of dynamical friction (see Section 2.2). We adopt 𝛽DF = 0.75 as
the fiducial value used in SatGen, since this yields the best agreement with
respect to the peak values of h𝑟 /𝑟vir i at 𝑧acc ∼ 0.25, which corresponds to
the first apocentric passage since infall.

[0, 1.5]. We apply the same selection function as used in van den
Bosch et al. (2016): we only consider subhaloes with 𝑚(𝑧 = 0)/𝑀0 ≥
10−3 , 𝑚 acc /𝑀0 ≥ 10−2 , and 𝑚(𝑧 = 0)/𝑚 acc ≥ 10−1 . We first bin
the subhaloes by 𝑚 acc /𝑀0 and then compute h𝑟/𝑟 vir i in 𝑧 acc bins,
which are chosen such that the number of subhaloes in each bin is
the same.
Fig. 5 shows the resulting h𝑟/𝑟 vir i − 𝑧 acc relation for four values
of 𝛽DF as indicated. Clearly, when 𝛽DF = 0.75, SatGen is able to
very closely reproduce the simulation results. For 𝛽DF = 0.5 (1.0),
SatGen yields apocentric h𝑟/𝑟 vir i that are too large (small) relative
to Bolshoi, with the disagreement being more significant for the
subhaloes with larger 𝑚 acc /𝑀0 that are more strongly influenced
by dynamical friction. These findings are independent of whether or
not we incorporate artificial disruption using the method described in
Section 2.4, which is consistent with the notion that the h𝑟/𝑟 vir i −𝑧 acc
relation should be relatively insensitive to artificial disruption (at
< 0.5). Hence, in what follows, we adopt 𝛽
least for 𝑧 acc ∼
DF = 0.75 as
our fiducial dynamical friction strength. In Section 3.3, we quantify
the impact of 𝛽DF on our substructure mass fraction predictions (by
comparing to the ‘natural’ case of 𝛽DF = 1), demonstrating that our
results are insensitive to its exact value.

The impact of artificial disruption
3 RESULTS
Given a host halo mass, 𝑀0 , target redshift, 𝑧 0 , and requested number
of individual trees, 𝑁tree , SatGen produces 𝑁tree subhalo catalogs
at each redshift time step until 𝑧 0 . These catalogs trace the mass and
phase space coordinates of each subhalo over its evolution. In this
section, we present the results of these SatGen subhalo catalogs and
make comparisons to Bolshoi. We begin by studying SHMFs (and
subhalo maximum circular velocity functions), comparing SatGen
results with and without the artificial disruption mechanism and
discuss the significant impact of splashback subhaloes (Section 3.1).
In Section 3.2, we proceed to incorporate position data by calculating
the radial profile and the (projected) enclosed substructure mass
fraction, 𝐹sub (< 𝑅). In Section 3.3, we quantify how 𝑓sub (< 𝑟 vir )
varies with both 𝑀0 and resolution limit, 𝜓res . We also quantify
the impact of model parameters (i.e., stripping efficiency and DF
strength) on 𝑓sub predictions. Lastly, in Section 3.4, we estimate
the total rate of numerical disruption that occurs via the W and D
channels modeled by SatGen, which we compare to the numerical
disruption rate of Bolshoi haloes (as measured by van den Bosch
2017).

3.1 Subhalo mass/velocity functions
We turn our attention to the SatGen predictions of the subhalo mass
function for a 1014.2 ℎ−1 M host. In a cosmological simulation, the
SHMF, d𝑁/d log(𝑚/𝑀0 ), is calculated using subhaloes of all orders enclosed within the virial radius of the host. Note that since we
use an inclusive mass definition and consider all orders of substructure, the total substructure mass is not the mass-weighted integral
of the SHMF. The left-hand panel of Fig. 6 shows the mean SHMF
computed from 10,000 trees (with 𝜓res = 10−4 ). For comparison,
the filled symbols indicate the mean SHMF of the 282 Bolshoi host
haloes with log(𝑀0 /[ℎ−1 M ]) ∈ [14.0, 14.5] (with a mean of 14.2).
On the high-𝑚/𝑀0 end, the Bolshoi SHMF is somewhat noisy due
to limited halo statistics. However, a comparison at the low-𝑚/𝑀0
end illustrates that SatGen predicts a ∼ 0.1 dex enhancement in the
SHMF relative to Bolshoi.
If the primary cause of the disagreement between the SatGen and
Bolshoi SHMFs is artificial disruption, then the application of our
artificial disruption mechanism (Section 2.4) should result in better
agreement between the model and simulation results. Indeed, Fig. 6
shows that “turning on” D channel disruption suppresses the SatGen
SHMF by ∼ 0.05 − 0.1 dex at low 𝑚/𝑀0 , bringing it into closer
agreement with Bolshoi. Restricting to −3.9 ≤ log(𝑚/𝑀0 ) ≤ −0.8,
we fit a power-law to the SHMF of the form d𝑁/d log(𝑚/𝑀0 ) ∝
𝐴(𝑚/𝑀0 ) 𝐵 . For the fiducial SatGen results, we find 𝐴 = −1.066 and
𝐵 = −0.885, whereas the disruption mechanism slightly suppresses
both the normalization and the magnitude of the slope, resulting in
𝐴 = −1.085 and 𝐵 = −0.868.10 The reduced slope is a consequence
of the 𝑚 acc -dependence of our artificial disruption model. Note that
the Bolshoi SHMF is too noisy to compute a reliable estimate of the
slope over the same mass range, but it agrees well visually with the
SatGen “disruption on” results.
Thus far, these results suggest that artificial disruption has, at most,
a ∼ 20% impact on the SHMF of well-resolved host haloes, with the

10

These SHMF slopes are consistent with previous work, which typically
find −1.0 . 𝐵 . −0.8 (e.g., Boylan-Kolchin et al. 2010; Gao et al. 2012; van
den Bosch & Jiang 2016).

9

difference being strongest at low 𝑚/𝑀0 . We discuss more quantitatively the impact of disruption and its dependence on halo mass relative to the simulation resolution limit in Section 3.3, which focuses
on the substructure mass fraction. The modest decrease in the SHMF
normalization due to disruption predicted by SatGen is considerably
smaller than the factor-of-two suppression suggested by the GB19interpretation of the Jiang & van den Bosch (2016) model. This is
because their orbit-averaged model did not take into account the impact of splashback haloes, which are subhaloes that have previously
fallen within the host 𝑟 vir (thus becoming included in the halo merger
tree) but instantaneously lie outside of 𝑟 vir at 𝑧 = 0 (and therefore
are typically not included in simulation-based measurements of the
SHMF). Benson (2017) briefly discusses this limitation of standard
EPS-based approaches to substructure modeling, concluding that a
full dynamical model (such as SatGen) is necessary in order to properly account for splashback haloes. In Fig. 6, we illustrate that when
splashback haloes are included in the SHMF, the subhalo abundance
is enhanced by ∼ 0.2 − 0.25 dex on the low-𝑚/𝑀0 end relative to the
fiducial model. When the “fiducial + splashback” curve is compared
directly to Bolshoi, we find the same ∼ 0.3 dex (factor of two) difference as GB19. This highlights the importance of properly accounting
for splashback haloes by integrating subhalo orbits. Consistent with
these predictions, Bakels et al. (2021) recently reported that roughly
half of all subhaloes lie outside of 1.2𝑟 200c (approximately 𝑟 vir ) in
a sample of galaxy- to group-mass host haloes studied in a cosmological simulation (consistent with previous work by, e.g., Gill et al.
2004; Ludlow et al. 2009).
In addition to mass, another property of subhaloes that is often used (especially in subhalo abundance matching, e.g., TrujilloGomez et al. 2011; Reddick et al. 2013; Hearin et al. 2013; Zentner
et al. 2014) is its maximum circular velocity, 𝑉max . Hence, we also
present results for the subhalo maximum circular velocity function
(SHVF), d𝑁/d ln(𝑉max /𝑉vir,h ), where 𝑉vir,h denotes the virial velocity of the host halo at 𝑧 = 0. Since the enclosed mass profile
corresponding to the GB19 ESHDP is not analytical, we compute
𝑉max by multiplying the subhalo’s maximum circular velocity at accretion,
√︄
𝐺𝑚 acc 0.216 𝑐 vir,s
𝑉max,acc =
×
(14)
𝑙 vir
𝑓 (𝑐 vir,s )
(Bullock et al. 2001), by the ‘tidal track’ (Peñarrubia et al. 2008)
expression for 𝑉max /𝑉max,acc , given by equation (11) in GB19. This
tidal track itself is a function of both 𝑚/𝑚 acc and 𝑐 vir,s , as given by
equations (12) and (13) in GB19.
Using the same 10,000 trees as those used to compute the
SHMF, we obtain the SHVF shown in the right-hand panel of
Fig. 6. Just as for the SHMF, the filled symbols indicate the corresponding result computed from the 282 Bolshoi host haloes with
log(𝑀0 /[ ℎ−1 M ]) ∈ [14.0, 14.5]. As is evident, the abundance
< − 0.4 predicted by SatGen is
of subhaloes with log(𝑉max /𝑉vir,h ) ∼
about 0.15 dex higher than that of Bolshoi. However, when including
artificial disruption, the SatGen predictions once again agree closely
with the simulation results.

3.2 Radial profiles
Having looked at the subhalo mass and velocity functions, we proceed to incorporate additional spatial information by considering
several other quantities of interest. First, we measure the subhalo
3|
˜
radial distribution, d 𝑁/d𝑥
sub , as the number of subhaloes per unit
shell volume as a function of 𝑥 = 𝑟/𝑟 vir , which we normalize to
MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2021)

10

S. B. Green, F. C. van den Bosch, and F. Jiang

2

Fiducial + splashback
Disruption on

1
0
−1

Residual

3
This work
Fiducial ∝ (m/M0 )−0.88

Residual log[dN/d log(Vmax/Vvir,h)]

log[dN/d log(m/M0)]

3

Bolshoi

0.25
0.00
−0.25

−3

−2

log(m/M0)

−1

0

2
1
0
−1

M0 = 1014.2 M /h

0.25
0.00

−0.25
−1.0

−0.8

−0.6

−0.4

log(Vmax/Vvir,h)

−0.2

0.0

Figure 6. The subhalo mass function (SHMF; left) and subhalo maximum circular velocity function (SHVF; right) predictions for a host halo with 𝑀0 =
1014.2 ℎ −1 M at 𝑧 = 0 (and virial velocity at 𝑧 = 0 denoted by 𝑉vir,h ). The SatGen results are averages taken over 10,000 merger trees generated with
𝜓res = 10−4 . These results are compared to the same quantities computed from 282 Bolshoi host haloes with log( 𝑀0 /[ ℎ −1 M ]) ∈ [14.0, 14.5] (with a mean
of 14.2), which are shown as gray squares. The fiducial SatGen predictions (black lines) are used as the baseline for comparison in the residual plots. In the
“fiducial + splashback” case (dashed black lines), we include subhaloes in the SHMF that are in the merger tree but instantaneously lie outside of the host
𝑟vir at 𝑧 = 0. Lastly, the “disruption on” case (green lines) demonstrates the impact of our artificial disruption mechanism (Section 2.4), which is calibrated
to reproduce the statistical properties of Bolshoi subhalo disruption (D channel). At the low-𝑚/𝑀0 end, artificial disruption suppresses the SatGen SHMF by
∼ 0.05 − 0.1 dex, which brings our predictions into good agreement with Bolshoi. For 𝑚/𝑀0 . 10−2.5 , nearly half of the subhaloes lie outside 𝑟vir (consistent
with Bakels et al. 2021).

unity at 𝑟 vir . We assess the radial bias of the subhaloes by compar3|
3
˜
˜
ing d 𝑁/d𝑥
sub to the NFW profile of the host halo, d 𝑁/d𝑥 | NFW ,
which we also write as a function of 𝑥 and normalize to unity at
𝑟 vir . The ‘bias function’ is simply the ratio between d ˜
𝑁/d𝑥 3 | sub and
d˜
𝑁/d𝑥 3 | NFW , which tends to unity when the subhalo distribution is
unbiased with respect to the density profile of the host. We incorpo3|
˜
rate subhaloes of all orders when computing d 𝑁/d𝑥
sub . The second
quantity of interest is the fraction of mass enclosed within a given
projected host-centric radius that is bound in subhaloes. We define
this quantity as
∑︁
1
𝑚𝑖 ,
(15)
𝐹sub (< 𝑋) =
𝑀 (< 𝑋)
𝑋𝑖 <𝑋

where 𝑋 = 𝑅/𝑅vir , 𝑅 is the projected radius, the sum runs over
all first-order subhaloes (due to the inclusive mass definition) with
projected radii within 𝑅, and 𝑀 (< 𝑅) is the projected mass profile of
the NFW host halo (see Golse & Kneib 2002). Finally, in Section 3.3,
we focus on 𝑓sub (< 𝑟 vir ), which is computed in the same way as 𝐹sub
except that three-dimensional radii are used instead.

3.2.1 Number density and radial bias profiles
We begin by studying d ˜
𝑁/d𝑥 3 | sub and the corresponding bias function in Fig. 7. Since we aim to make direct comparisons to Bolshoi, we set 𝜓res = 𝑚 res,B /𝑀0 , where 𝑚 res,B = 109.83 ℎ−1 M
corresponds to the 50-particle halo limit that we impose on the
Bolshoi results. For 𝑀0 = 1014.2 ℎ−1 M , this corresponds to
log(𝜓res ) = −4.37. We compare the mean results obtained from
2,000 SatGen trees with the mean of the 282 Bolshoi host haloes
MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2021)

with log(𝑀0 /[ ℎ−1 M ]) ∈ [14.0, 14.5]. The shaded regions denote
the 16–84 percentiles of the halo-to-halo variance. The SatGen results are shown for three cases. The “fiducial” result considers all
subhaloes with 𝑚/𝑚 acc ≥ 𝜙res = 10−5 , whereas the “withering” result is limited to subhaloes with 𝑚 ≥ 𝜓res 𝑀0 . Lastly, the “withering
+ disruption” result includes the impact of the artificial disruption
mechanism and thus can be compared directly to Bolshoi.
The radial profile of Bolshoi subhaloes becomes increasingly biased towards the central region of the host, something that has been
pointed out in numerous previous studies (e.g., Diemand et al. 2004;
Springel et al. 2008; Han et al. 2016). The Bolshoi radial profile and
bias function are reproduced exquisitely by SatGen, but only when
the impact of both withering and artificial disruption are included.
Modeling the simulation mass limit alone is sufficient to reproduce
the Bolshoi mean curves within the halo-to-halo variance of SatGen;
however, when artificial disruption is also taken into account, the
mean curves are brought into near perfect agreement. Artificial dis3|
˜
ruption further suppresses the mean d 𝑁/d𝑥
sub by roughly a factor
of two in the central region of the host. When all subhaloes can instead evolve down to 𝑚/𝑚 acc = 10−5 , regardless of 𝑚 acc , we find
that the radial bias is completely eliminated. In fact, we obtain a
slight overabundance of subhaloes towards the centre. This is due to
dynamical friction, as we obtain a fully unbiased radial profile when
we set 𝛽DF = 0 (i.e., no dynamical friction). We note that Han et al.
(2016) report a similar finding in the Aquarius simulations (Springel
et al. 2008). By following the most-bound particle at accretion of all
subhaloes (regardless of whether or not the subhalo survives to the
present day), they find a dynamical friction-driven overabundance of
subhalo remnants in the halo centre that decreases towards a fully unbiased profile as 𝑚 acc decreases. Taken together with SatGen, these

Bolshoi
Mean host NFW

log(dÑ /dx3|sub)

3

11

0.5
0.0

−0.5

2

−1.0

1

−1.0

−0.5

This work
Fiducial
Withering
Withering + disruption

−1.5

ψres = 10−4.37
M0 = 1014.2 h−1 M

0
−1.5

log(dÑ /dx3|sub/dÑ /dx3|NFW )

The impact of artificial disruption

0.0

log(x ≡ r/rvir)

−2.0
−1.5

−1.0

−0.5

0.0

log(x ≡ r/rvir)

Figure 7. The subhalo radial profile (including subhaloes of all orders), d 𝑁˜ /d𝑥 3 | sub (left), normalized to unity at 𝑟vir and the bias function (right), which quantifies
how the radial profile differs from the host density profile. The SatGen results are computed from 2,000 merger trees of systems with 𝑀0 = 1014.2 ℎ −1 M
at 𝑧 = 0 and a merger tree resolution limit of 𝜓res = 10−4.37 , consistent with the Bolshoi resolution limit for hosts of the same mass. The lines represent the
sample means and the shaded regions denote the 16–84 percentiles taken over the sample, which quantify the halo-to-halo variance. The fiducial result (red)
includes all subhaloes with 𝑚/𝑚acc ≥ 10−5 (approximating the lack of a resolution limit), whereas the “withering” result (blue) mimics the Bolshoi mass limit
by only including subhaloes down to 𝑚 = 𝜓res 𝑀0 . Lastly, “withering + disruption” (green) additionally includes the statistical treatment of artificial disruption
(Section 2.4). The same quantities are computed from the 282 Bolshoi host haloes with log( 𝑀0 /[ ℎ −1 M ]) ∈ [14.0, 14.5] (black squares). When artificial
disruption and withering are taken into account, SatGen is able to exquisitely reproduce the Bolshoi bias function. In the absence of such numerical limitations,
SatGen predicts a nearly unbiased radial profile (in agreement with Han et al. 2016).

results demonstrate that the chief cause of the dearth of subhaloes
in the central regions of haloes is the limiting mass resolution of
the simulation. It is neither physical nor primarily a manifestation of
artificial disruption; the latter only makes a relatively modest impact.

Fig. 8 compares the 𝐹sub (< 𝑋) predictions of SatGen to the results of Bolshoi.11 We use the same SatGen data, simulation data,
and plotting conventions as in Fig. 7, with the only difference being
that the curves/points correspond to sample medians. Since the (projected) enclosed substructure mass fraction, 𝐹sub (< 𝑋), is simply a
mass-weighted radial profile, and since SatGen reproduces both the
SHMF and radial profile of Bolshoi subhaloes, it should come as
little surprise that the model also succeeds at predicting 𝐹sub (< 𝑋).
Once again, when we include the effects of both withering and artificial disruption, the model predictions are in nearly perfect agreement
with Bolshoi. Without accounting for artificial disruption, the median Bolshoi 𝐹sub (< 𝑋) curve barely lies within the halo-to-halo
variance of the withering-only prediction (for small 𝑋). Similar to
d˜
𝑁/d𝑥 3 | sub , at 𝑋 ≈ 0.1, artificial disruption suppresses the median
𝐹sub by roughly a factor of two. The difference between the fiducial and withering-only model prediction is quite small, which lies in
stark contrast to the number density profile. The reason for this is that
the enhanced resolution of the fiducial model predominantly results
in an increased abundance of highly stripped low-𝑚 acc subhaloes,
which contribute little to the total substructure mass but make up

log[Fsub(≤ X)]

3.2.2 Projected enclosed substructure fraction

0

−1

This work
Fiducial
W
W+D

−2
M0 = 1014.2 h−1 M
ψres = 10−4.37

−3

Bolshoi

−2.0

−1.5

−1.0

log(X ≡ R/Rvir)

−0.5

0.0

Figure 8. The fraction of mass enclosed within a given projected host-centric
radius that is bound in first-order subhaloes, 𝐹sub (< 𝑋 ), as defined in equation (15). The same SatGen predictions, Bolshoi results, and plotting conventions are used as in Fig. 7, with the exception being that the curves/points
instead correspond to the sample medians. When both withering and artificial
disruption are emulated, SatGen closely reproduces the Bolshoi 𝐹sub (< 𝑋 )
profile. The substructure mass fraction is only weakly enhanced by the additional resolution in 𝑚/𝑚acc -space afforded by the fiducial model, but it is
reasonably sensitive to 𝜓res (see Section 3.3).

11

Since the simulation halo catalogs are constructed such that subhaloes
must be instantaneously located within the virial radius of their host, we also
only consider SatGen subhaloes within the three-dimensional virial extent of
the host halo when computing 𝐹sub (< 𝑋 ).

a substantial portion of the number density. As we discuss in Section 3.3, the substructure mass fraction is primarily sensitive to the
merger tree resolution (𝜓res ).
MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2021)

12

S. B. Green, F. C. van den Bosch, and F. Jiang

3.2.3 Dependence of d ˜
𝑁/d𝑥 3 | sub on subhalo properties

3.3.1 Comparison of 𝑓sub (𝜓res ) to Bolshoi

We have demonstrated that by properly modeling the effects of withering and artificial disruption on the subhalo population, SatGen
can successfully reproduce the radial distribution of simulated subhaloes. We now take a closer look at the d ˜
𝑁/d𝑥 3 | sub predictions
of our fiducial model in the absence of these numerical depletion
channels. Here, we analyze the results of 2,000 SatGen trees with
𝑀0 = 1014.2 ℎ−1 M at 𝑧 = 0 and 𝜓res = 𝜙res = 10−5 . Thus, the
lowest-𝑚 acc subhaloes are tracked all the way down to 104.2 ℎ−1 M .
In Fig. 9, we plot the mean d ˜
𝑁/d𝑥 3 | sub computed using subhaloes
from these trees while varying the lower limit of several properties:
(i) 𝑚 acc /𝑀0 , (ii) 𝑚/𝑚 acc , (iii) 𝑉peak /𝑉vir,h , where 𝑉peak is the peak
𝑉max attained by the subhalo over its life (in SatGen, this is equivalent to the 𝑉max at accretion, 𝑉max,acc ), (iv) 𝑉max /𝑉peak , (v) 𝑚/𝑀0 ,
and (vi) log(1 + 𝑧 acc ). For comparison, we also plot the mean Bolshoi
3|
˜
d 𝑁/d𝑥
sub computed using all subhaloes (i.e., the same as in Fig. 7)
in each panel. Lastly, in order to facilitate a comparison with the segregation study of van den Bosch et al. (2016), we also compute the
Spearman rank correlation coefficient, 𝑟 s , between 𝑟/𝑟 vir and each of
the six properties computed with all subhaloes (denoted 𝑟 s,all ) and
with subhaloes that would survive Bolshoi withering (𝑚 > 𝑚 res,B )
and artificial disruption (denoted 𝑟 s,W+D , which can be directly compared to the Bolshoi results, 𝑟 s,B ).
The normalized radial profile is nearly independent of 𝑚 acc /𝑀0
and 𝑉peak /𝑉vir,h . When both withering and artificial disruption are
taken into account, we find that 𝑟 s for each of these properties
is consistent with the corresponding Bolshoi result reported by
van den Bosch et al. (2016). The 𝑚/𝑚 acc , 𝑚/𝑀0 , 𝑉max /𝑉peak , and
log(1 + 𝑧 acc ) panels all tell a similar story: older, less massive, and
highly-stripped subhaloes follow the host potential with minimal
bias. However, recently accreted, massive, and minimally-stripped
systems are biased towards the halo outskirts. These trends are weakened by withering and artificial disruption, bringing the 𝑟 s,W+D for
each into good agreement with van den Bosch et al. (2016).
Taken together, SatGen predicts that the full subhalo population
should exhibit little bias with respect to the host. The dearth of
subhaloes in the halo centre, which is found universally in dark
matter-only simulations (e.g., Ghigna et al. 1998; Springel et al. 2001;
Diemand et al. 2004; Springel et al. 2008; Han et al. 2016), is a result
of inadequate resolution that causes the non-physical elimination of
old, highly-stripped subhalo remnants that should be abundant in the
host core.

We begin by demonstrating the 𝜓res -dependence of 𝑓sub . Here, we include artificial disruption in the SatGen predictions in order to facilitate comparisons with Bolshoi. In Fig. 10, we plot 𝑓sub (𝜓res ) for several different halo masses. The SatGen predictions are obtained using
10,000 trees (with 𝜓res = 10−4 ) of haloes with 𝑀0 = 1011−14 ℎ−1 M
at 𝑧 = 0. The Bolshoi results are computed from the 8815, 4713, 1138,
and 244 host haloes with 𝑀0 = 1011±0.01 , 1012±0.02 , 1013±0.04 , and
1014±0.1 ℎ−1 M at 𝑧 = 0. For each halo mass, we only show results
down to the 𝜓res that corresponds to the 50-particle Bolshoi mass
limit. As is evident, when combined with the Bolshoi-calibrated artificial disruption mechanism, SatGen is able to accurately reproduce
the subhalo statistics (and their resolution dependence) of simulated
haloes over several orders of magnitude in mass. There is some
> 0.1, indicating that the SHMFs of SatGen and
tension for 𝜓res ∼
Bolshoi disagree at the massive end. However, this likely reflects uncertainties with the (sub)halo finder used to analyze the simulation
results rather than a shortcoming of SatGen (see van den Bosch &
Jiang 2016 for a detailed discussion).

3.3 Substructure mass fractions
We denote the fraction of matter bound into subhaloes within the
virial radius of the host as 𝑓sub (< 𝑟 vir ). In this section, we study how
the SatGen predictions of 𝑓sub (< 𝑟 vir ) vary with resolution limit, set
by 𝜓res , and how they are affected by artificial disruption. In what
follows, we write 𝑓sub (𝜓res ) to represent the value of 𝑓sub (< 𝑟 vir )
computed from first-order subhaloes with 𝑚 > 𝜓res 𝑀0 . Written
explicitly,
1
𝑓sub (𝜓res ) =
𝑀0

∑︁

𝑚𝑖 ,

(16)

𝑟 <𝑟vir
𝑚>𝜓res 𝑀0

where the summation runs over first-order subhaloes only. We conclude the section by demonstrating that 𝑓sub is insensitive to small
changes in the stripping efficiency parameter, 𝛼, and the dynamical
friction strength, 𝛽DF .
MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2021)

3.3.2 Mass-dependence and halo-to-halo variance of 𝑓sub
Fig. 11 plots 𝑓sub (𝜓res = 10−4 ) as a function of host halo mass. These
results have been obtained using 10,000 trees each (with 𝜓res = 10−4 )
for haloes with log(𝑀0 /[ ℎ−1 M ]) ∈ [11, 15] at 𝑧 = 0. Note that we
have not included our treatment of artificial disruption here and the
results are thus intended to reflect estimates of the true subhalo mass
fractions in the absence of numerical artifacts. The left-hand panel
shows the mean, median and 16–84 percentiles for both first- and
second-order subhaloes, as indicated, whereas the right-hand panel
plots the corresponding cumulative distribution functions.
Overall, the trends shown are consistent with the orbit-averaged
model used by Jiang & van den Bosch (2017): 𝑓sub increases with
𝑀0 and the halo-to-halo variance decreases slightly with 𝑀0 . As
discussed in detail in Jiang & van den Bosch (2017), this halo-tohalo variance is predominately driven by variance in the halo mass
accretion histories (see also e.g., Giocoli et al. 2010; Green et al.
2020). The second-order 𝑓sub also increases with 𝑀0 , has much larger
log-scatter than the total 𝑓sub , and its mean is smaller by a factor of
≈ 15 − 30. This difference between first- and second-order 𝑓sub is
considerably larger than predicted by Jiang & van den Bosch (2017),
which is primarily due to the fact that SatGen allows higher-order
subhaloes to be stripped from their parent subhalo (see Section 2.3.3).
For comparison, we also plot the result of Okabe et al. (2014),
+0.111
who used weak gravitational lensing to infer 𝑓sub = 0.226−0.085
for the Coma cluster,12 which is assumed to have a mass of
14 −1
𝑀0 = 8.92+20.05
−5.17 ×10 ℎ M (Okabe et al. 2010). Our SatGen predictions are in excellent agreement with this measurement, demonstrating consistency between observations and the ΛCDM paradigm.

3.3.3 Impact of disruption on 𝑓sub
Overall, the results of previous subsections illustrate that artificial
disruption impacts subhalo statistics less significantly than the factor
of two suggested by GB19. We now formalize this by comparing

This subhalo mass fraction is measured with 𝜓res = 10−3 , rather than 10−4 .
< 0.1 dex smaller than
As shown in Fig. 10, the mean 𝑓sub ( 𝜓res = 10−3 ) is ∼
𝑓sub ( 𝜓res = 10−4 ) for high-mass host haloes, which is negligible compared
to both the halo-to-halo variance and the measurement error.
12

The impact of artificial disruption
rs,all = +0.01
rs,W+D = −0.15
rs,B = −0.14

log(dÑ /dx3|sub)

3

rs,all = −0.21 log(Vpeak /Vvir,h ) ≥
rs,W+D = −0.18
−1.35
rs,B = −0.21

log(macc /M0 ) ≥
−5.00
−4.50
−4.00
−3.50

2

−1.12
−0.88
−0.65

rs,all = +0.51
rs,W+D = −0.02
rs,B = +0.12

log(m/M0 ) ≥

rs,all = −0.46
rs,W+D = −0.24
rs,B = −0.33

log(1 + zacc ) ≥

13

−10.00
−8.00
−6.00
−4.00

1
0

Bolshoi
Mean host NFW

log(dÑ /dx3|sub)

3

rs,all = +0.57
rs,W+D = +0.34
rs,B = +0.40

rs,all = +0.57
rs,W+D = +0.31
rs,B = +0.24

log(m/macc ) ≥
−5.00
−4.00
−3.00
−2.00

2

log(Vmax /Vpeak ) ≥
−1.50
−1.12
−0.75
−0.38

1.00
0.80
0.60
0.40

1
ψres = φres = 10−5

0
−1.5

−1.0

log(x)

−0.5

0.0 −1.5

−1.0

−0.5

log(x ≡ r/rvir)

0.0 −1.5

−1.0

log(x)

−0.5

0.0

Figure 9. The subhalo radial profiles for 2,000 SatGen trees with 𝑀0 = 1014.2 ℎ −1 M at 𝑧 = 0 and 𝜓res = 𝜙res = 10−5 . In each panel, the subhaloes are
segmented by a different property and the mean d 𝑁˜ /d𝑥 3 | sub is computed for each lower bound. In order to assess the amount of bias, we plot the mean density
profile of the host in each panel (dotted line). We overplot the mean Bolshoi radial profile of all subhaloes in each panel (black squares). We compute the
Spearman coefficient between 𝑟 /𝑟vir and each property for all subhaloes (𝑟s,all ) and the subhaloes that would survive Bolshoi withering and artificial disruption
(𝑟s,W+D ). There is little dependence on 𝑚acc /𝑀0 and 𝑉peak /𝑉vir,h . As evidenced by the 𝑚/𝑚acc and 𝑉max /𝑉peak panels, highly-stripped subhaloes follow
the host density profile with little bias whereas minimally-stripped systems are less commonly found in the halo centre. Similarly, massive, recently accreted
subhaloes are biased towards the outer halo whereas the inclusion of older, less massive subhaloes leads to a more unbiased profile. Withering and artificial
disruption tend to weaken (or reverse) the Spearman correlation between each property and 𝑟 /𝑟vir , bringing our 𝑟s,W+D into good agreement with Bolshoi (𝑟s,B ,
as computed in van den Bosch et al. 2016).

log[hfsub(ψres)i]

−0.5
−1.0
−1.5
−2.0
−2.5
−3.0
−4

SatGen

Bolshoi
11.00 ± 0.01
12.00 ± 0.02
13.00 ± 0.04
14.00 ± 0.1

11
12
13
14

−3

−2

log(ψres)

−1

Figure 10. The average fraction of mass bound in subhaloes with 𝑚 > 𝜓res 𝑀0
within 𝑟vir of host haloes of a given 𝑀0 , as defined in equation (16). The
SatGen predictions are generated using 10,000 trees for each halo mass and
are suppressed via the artificial disruption model (Section 2.4). The masses
in the legend are reported in log( 𝑀0 /[ ℎ −1 M ]). We plot the curves down to
the 𝜓res that corresponds to the Bolshoi 50-particle mass limit for each 𝑀0 .
The model predictions agree well with the simulation results over a range of
𝑀0 .

SatGen predictions of 𝑓sub (𝜓res = 𝑚 res,B /𝑀0 ) with and without the
impact of artificial disruption included (but with the same degree of
withering in both cases since 𝜓res is fixed). For this test, we use 10,000
trees with 𝜓res = 10−4 and 𝑀0 = 1012 and 1013 ℎ−1 M as well as
2,000 trees with 𝜓res = 10−5 and 𝑀0 = 1014.2 ℎ−1 M in order
to estimate 𝑓sub (𝜓res = 𝑚 res,B /𝑀0 ) with and without disruption.13
We find that artificial disruption results in a relative suppression of
𝑓sub (𝜓res = 𝑚 res,B /𝑀0 ) by 8%, 10%, and 12% for 𝑀0 = 1012 , 1013 ,
and 1014.2 ℎ−1 M , respectively. Indeed, this level of suppression
is significantly less than a factor of two (i.e., 50%). As already discussed in Section 3.1, the primary reason that the GB19 estimate
of the artificial disruption impact is much larger is that the orbitaveraged model on which their estimate is based does not account
for splashback haloes (i.e., the fact that at any moment in time about
half of all haloes ever accreted by the host are located outside of the
virial radius).
3.3.4 Insensitivity of 𝑓sub to the model parameter choices
The substructure mass fraction is a useful summary statistic for illustrating how sensitive SatGen is to our model parameters (the
stripping efficiency, 𝛼, and the dynamical friction strength, 𝛽DF ).
For this test, we once again focus on 𝑀0 = 1014.2 ℎ−1 M haloes.
We use 10,000 trees with 𝜓res = 10−4 and evolve the subhaloes using
13

Note that we need additional resolution for the high-mass case in order to
resolve the merger trees down to 𝑚res,B .
MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2021)

14

S. B. Green, F. C. van den Bosch, and F. Jiang

1.0
First order

0.8

−2

P (≤ fsub)

−1
Mean
Median
Okabe+14

0.4
0.2

−3
11

0.6

11
12
13
14
15
Okabe+14

log[fsub(ψres = 10−4)]

0

Second order

12

13

14

log(M0/[h−1M ])

15

0.0
−4

−3

−2

−1

log[fsub(ψres = 10−4)]

0

Figure 11. The total (first-order) and second-order 𝑓sub ( 𝜓res = 10−4 ) predictions of SatGen in the absence of artificial disruption. The mean, median, and
16–84 percentile halo-to-halo variance of 𝑓sub (left) as well as the corresponding cumulative distribution function (right) are computed using 10,000 trees of
haloes with 𝑀0 = 1011−15 ℎ −1 M at 𝑧 = 0. The masses in the legend are reported in log( 𝑀0 /[ ℎ −1 M ]). Due to the inclusive mass definition, the first-order
𝑓sub includes the mass of subhaloes of all-orders, whereas the second-order 𝑓sub includes the mass of subhaloes of order-2 and higher. For comparison, we
plot the gravitational lensing estimate of 𝑓sub ( 𝜓res = 10−3 ) for the Coma cluster measured by Okabe et al. (2014), finding excellent agreement with our model
predictions.

each of the following cases: (i) our fiducial parameters (𝛽DF = 0.75
and 𝛼 = 𝛼(𝑐 vir,s /𝑐 vir,h ) described by equation [11]), (ii) fiducial
𝛽DF = 0.75 and fixed 𝛼 = 0.6, and (iii) fiducial 𝛼 = 𝛼(𝑐 vir,s /𝑐 vir,h )
and the ‘natural’ 𝛽DF = 1.0 (i.e., Chandrasekhar dynamical friction
without a correction factor). As our benchmark, we consider the fractional change in the mean 𝑓sub (𝜓res = 10−4 ) relative to the fiducial
case. Setting 𝛼 = 0.6 results in a 2% relative increase in 𝑓sub relative
to fiducial. Increasing 𝛽DF from 0.75 to 1.0 results in a ∼ 4% relative
decrease in 𝑓sub . The level of impact on other statistics (i.e., SHMF,
radial profiles) is comparable. Hence, we conclude that our model
predictions are reliable at the level of a few percent and that the uncertainties are small in comparison to the halo-to-halo variance. The
sensitivity to these parameters is also significantly smaller than the
impact of artificial disruption on the results of cosmological simulations, making SatGen a more reliable alternative for studying the
substructure of dark matter haloes.

3.4 Total W + D disruption rate
The artificial disruption mechanism of Section 2.4 is constructed
such that the D channel population of SatGen subhaloes has an 𝑓dis
distribution consistent with that of Bolshoi. However, this alone is
not sufficient to guarantee that the W + D numerical disruption rate
of SatGen subhaloes is in agreement with the 13%/Gyr that van den
Bosch (2017) measured from the W + D channel Bolshoi subhaloes.
In order to make a fair comparison between the SatGen W + D
disruption rate and Bolshoi, we run the following test. Starting with
the same sample of Bolshoi host halo masses (at 𝑧 ∼ 0) as used in
van den Bosch (2017), we randomly sub-sample 40,000 masses from
the total of ∼160,000. Rather than use a fixed 𝜓res , we instead set
𝜓res = 𝑚 res,B /𝑀0 , where 𝑚 res,B = 109.83 ℎ−1 M is the 50-particle
Bolshoi resolution mass. Following the procedure of van den Bosch
(2017), we determine the W + D disruption rate by measuring the
MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2021)

fraction of the subhaloes present at 𝑧 = 0.0174 (i.e., 240 Myr ago)
that have been disrupted (either via the W or D channel) by 𝑧 = 0. In
particular, our 𝑧 = 0.0174 sample consists of all subhaloes that have
merged with the host, have a mass above both 𝑚 res,B and the assigned
𝑚 dis (i.e., it has neither disrupted nor withered by 𝑧 = 0.0174), and
have an instantaneous orbital radius within 𝑟 vir of the host centre.
The subset of this sample with a 𝑧 = 0 mass below either 𝑚 res,B
or its assigned 𝑚 dis are counted as having numerically disrupted between 𝑧 = 0.0174 and 𝑧 = 0. We convert this disruption fraction
into a rate by dividing it by the 240 Myr time interval considered.
Using this approach, we determine that the combination of withering
and our artificial disruption mechanism yields a W + D numerical
disruption rate of ∼16.7%/Gyr, which is only slightly larger than the
13%/Gyr that van den Bosch (2017) measured in Bolshoi. Hence, we
conclude that our implementation of artificial disruption in SatGen
accurately reproduces this numerical artifact in the Bolshoi simulation. However, we caution that it may not adequately describe artificial disruption in other simulations, each of which is likely to have
subtly different disruption statistics. The real strength of SatGen is
not its ability to reproduce the results of cosmological simulations but
rather to make reliable predictions that are free from the numerical
limitations that hamper such simulations.

4 SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION
This work represents the culmination of several previous studies
aimed at quantifying the impact of artificial disruption on stateof-the-art dark matter-only cosmological simulations. Studying the
evolution of Bolshoi subhaloes, van den Bosch (2017) found that the
combined effect of the finite mass resolution (i.e., withering) and
artificial disruption results in rapid depletion of the subhalo population. In the follow-up studies of van den Bosch et al. (2018) and
van den Bosch & Ogiya (2018), the authors used a combination of

The impact of artificial disruption
analytical arguments and idealized numerical experiments to demonstrate that complete physical disruption of ΛCDM subhalo remnants
is exceedingly rare, concluding that the majority of disruption seen
in cosmological simulations must be numerical in nature. Following
this, Ogiya et al. (2019) released the DASH library of high-resolution
idealized simulations of halo mergers. This data release marked the
beginning of a research program focused on developing a new semianalytical model of subhalo evolution that is calibrated independently
of cosmological simulations, enabling its predictions to be free of the
effects of artificial disruption. Thus, GB19 used DASH to construct
an accurate model of the evolved subhalo density profile, which is
a simple function of the initial profile and the fraction of mass lost
since infall (similar to the approaches of, e.g., Hayashi et al. 2003;
Peñarrubia et al. 2010; Drakos et al. 2017; Errani & Navarro 2020).
Additionally, using the orbit-averaged subhalo evolution model and
artificial disruption mechanism of Jiang & van den Bosch (2016),
GB19 inferred that artificial disruption could potentially be responsible for suppressing the SHMF normalization by as much as a factor
of two. Recently, Jiang et al. (2021) released the SatGen library, a
new semi-analytical modeling framework for studying subhalo and
satellite galaxy evolution in a full dynamical context (i.e., the orbits of
individual subhaloes are integrated instead of using an orbit-averaged
approach).
In the present paper, we used SatGen as a scaffolding to develop a
comprehensive model of substructure evolution that is not adversely
impacted by the limitations of artificial disruption and simulation
resolution limits. To this end, we made several modifications and
improvements to SatGen, which we summarize below:
• The initial orbits of infalling subhaloes are sampled using the
state-of-the-art model of Li et al. (2020) (see Appendix A). This
model marks an improvement over previous approaches (e.g., Zentner
et al. 2005; Wetzel 2011; Jiang et al. 2015) because it is expressed as
a general function of the host halo peak height and host-to-subhalo
mass ratio. Furthermore, the free parameters of the model were fit
using a large simulation suite.
• The evolved subhalo density profiles (ESHDPs) are characterized using the model of GB19 (Section 2.3.1). At infall, subhaloes
are assumed to have NFW profiles. However, as mass is stripped and
𝑚/𝑚 acc decreases, the profile becomes tidally truncated in a manner
consistent with the evolution of DASH subhaloes.
• In line with the original SatGen implementation, the instantaneous subhalo mass-loss rate (Section 2.3.2) is written according to
equation (7), which depends on the King (1962) tidal radius (computed using the ESHDPs), the local dynamical time, and the “stripping efficiency”, 𝛼. We re-calibrated 𝛼 (equation [11]) so that the
mass-loss model accurately reproduces the 𝑚(𝑡)/𝑚 acc trajectories of
DASH subhaloes.
• The strength of the (Chandrasekhar) dynamical friction is controlled by a correction factor, 𝛽DF , which we calibrate such that
SatGen reproduces the 𝑚 acc /𝑀0 -dependence of the h𝑟/𝑟 vir i − 𝑧 acc
relation of Bolshoi subhaloes (Section 2.5). We have demonstrated
that the resulting best-fit value (𝛽DF = 0.75) is not adversely affected
by artificial disruption in the Bolshoi simulation.
• In order to assess the impact of artificial disruption on simulations, we developed a model that reproduces the statistical properties
of disruption in Bolshoi that can be optionally applied to SatGen
results. We found that the 𝑓dis distribution of disrupted (D channel)
Bolshoi subhaloes is well-described by a family of log-normal distributions, the parameters of which are functions of 𝑚 acc (Section 2.4).
• SatGen is ideally suited to assess the impact of the resolution
limit of numerical simulations by only including subhaloes with

15

a final mass that lies above the merger tree resolution (i.e., 𝑚 >
𝜓res 𝑀0 ). In addition, by instead allowing each subhalo to evolve
down to arbitrary 𝜙res = 𝑚/𝑚 acc (here, we have used values as low
as 𝜙res = 10−5 ), SatGen can model the subhalo population with an
effectively “arbitrary resolution”.
We used this updated model to predict subhalo mass and maximum circular velocity functions, number density profiles, radial bias
profiles, and substructure mass fractions. We considered the effect
of both the simulation mass limit and artificial disruption on each
quantity and studied the dependence of 𝑓sub on host halo mass. We
summarize our most notable findings below:
• When the effects of both withering and artificial disruption are
included, SatGen yields subhalo demographics in excellent agreement with Bolshoi.
• Artificial disruption only results in a ∼ 8 − 12% suppression
of 𝑓sub (< 𝑟 vir ) and a ∼ 20% suppression of the SHMF. While still
significant, this greatly ameliorates previous concerns that the overall
abundance of dark matter subhaloes could be artificially suppressed
by a factor of two. However, the impact of artificial disruption is
more pronounced at smaller host-centric radii, where it halves both
3|
˜
𝐹sub (< 𝑋) and d 𝑁/d𝑥
sub within ∼ 0.1𝑟 vir .
• By comparing the SHMF computed by including only subhaloes
within 𝑟 vir (i.e., consistent with simulation approaches) to the SHMF
computed by including all surviving subhaloes ever accreted by the
host, we infer that splashback haloes make up roughly half of the
total subhalo population. This is in good agreement with results from
several simulation studies (e.g., Gill et al. 2004; Ludlow et al. 2009;
Bakels et al. 2021). Hence, it is essential that semi-analytical models
of subhalo and satellite galaxy evolution properly account for the
splashback population. This is naturally achieved with full dynamical
models, such as SatGen, which integrate the orbits of individual
subhaloes. At the same time, it indicates a serious limitation of orbitaveraged approaches, such as those used in van den Bosch et al.
(2005b) and Jiang & van den Bosch (2016).
• We have demonstrated that the radial bias in the subhalo number density (i.e., the dearth of subhaloes in the halo centre relative
to the host density profile), a feature that is consistently present in
dark matter-only simulations (e.g., Ghigna et al. 1998; Springel et al.
2001; Diemand et al. 2004; Springel et al. 2008; Han et al. 2016), is
predominantly an artifact of the simulation mass resolution (at least
in the absence of baryonic processes) and not of artificial disruption.
The latter only slightly enhances the bias and is subdominant to the
impact of the mass resolution. By allowing subhaloes to evolve down
to arbitrarily low 𝑚/𝑚 acc (as opposed to having a fixed absolute
mass limit), the radial bias is completely eliminated. In fact, dynamical friction causes a slight enhancement of the subhalo number
density relative to the host profile near the halo centre, which marks
a complete reversal of the trend seen in simulations.
Although the model presented here is able to accurately reproduce
the subhalo statistics of a cosmological simulation when its numerical limitations are properly taken into account, the true strength
of the updated version of SatGen presented here lies in the fact
that it can be used to predict subhalo demographics with an arbitrarily high resolution and in the absence of artificial disruption.
We have therefore made the updated code publicly available in the
hope that it will enable/accommodate a wide variety of future research programs. For example, SatGen could prove a powerful tool
to investigate claimed discrepancies between simulations and observations regarding the abundance and central concentration of dark
matter substructure (e.g., Carlsten et al. 2020; Meneghetti et al. 2020)
MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2021)

16

S. B. Green, F. C. van den Bosch, and F. Jiang

and/or the dark matter deficiency of associated satellite galaxies (e.g.,
Ogiya 2018; Jackson et al. 2021).

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank Uddipan Banik, Nicole Drakos, Dhruba Dutta
Chowdhury, Zhaozhou Li, and Go Ogiya for helpful conversations
throughout the development of this work. SBG is supported by the US
National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under
Grant No. DGE-1752134. FCvdB is supported by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration through Grant No. 17-ATP17-0028
issued as part of the Astrophysics Theory Program. FJ is supported
by the Troesh Fellowship from the California Institute of Technology.

DATA AVAILABILITY
The DASH simulation data is available online.14 The updated SatGen
library is available in the sheridan branch of the SatGen GitHub
repository.15

REFERENCES
Aung H., Nagai D., Rozo E., García R., 2021, MNRAS, 502, 1041
Bakels L., Ludlow A. D., Power C., 2021, MNRAS, 501, 5948
Behroozi P. S., Wechsler R. H., Conroy C., 2013, ApJ, 770, 57
Benson A. J., 2017, MNRAS, 467, 3454
Benson A. J., 2020, MNRAS, 493, 1268
Benson A. J., Frenk C. S., Baugh C. M., Cole S., Lacey C. G., 2001, MNRAS,
327, 1041
Berlind A. A., et al., 2003, ApJ, 593, 1
Binney J., Tremaine S., 2008, Galactic Dynamics: Second Edition. Princeton
University Press
Bonaca A., et al., 2020, ApJ, 892, L37
Bose S., et al., 2017, MNRAS, 464, 4520
Boylan-Kolchin M., Springel V., White S. D. M., Jenkins A., 2010, MNRAS,
406, 896
Bryan G. L., Norman M. L., 1998, ApJ, 495, 80
Bullock J. S., Kolatt T. S., Sigad Y., Somerville R. S., Kravtsov A. V., Klypin
A. A., Primack J. R., Dekel A., 2001, MNRAS, 321, 559
Burkert A., 2000, ApJ, 534, L143
Campbell D., van den Bosch F. C., Padmanabhan N., Mao Y.-Y., Zentner
A. R., Lange J. U., Jiang F., Villarreal A., 2018, MNRAS, 477, 359
Carlberg R. G., 2012, ApJ, 748, 20
Carlsten S. G., Greene J. E., Peter A. H. G., Greco J. P., Beaton R. L., 2020,
ApJ, 902, 124
Chandrasekhar S., 1943, ApJ, 97, 255
Chaves-Montero J., Angulo R. E., Schaye J., Schaller M., Crain R. A., Furlong
M., Theuns T., 2016, MNRAS, 460, 3100
Cole S., Lacey C. G., Baugh C. M., Frenk C. S., 2000, MNRAS, 319, 168
Colín P., Avila-Reese V., González-Samaniego A., Velázquez H., 2015, ApJ,
803, 28
Conroy C., Wechsler R. H., Kravtsov A. V., 2006, ApJ, 647, 201
Dalal N., Kochanek C. S., 2002, ApJ, 572, 25
Delos M. S., 2019, Phys. Rev. D, 100, 063505
Diemand J., Moore B., Stadel J., 2004, MNRAS, 352, 535
Diemand J., Kuhlen M., Madau P., 2007, ApJ, 667, 859
Diemer B., 2020a, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2007.10992
Diemer B., 2020b, ApJS, 251, 17
Drakos N. E., Taylor J. E., Benson A. J., 2017, MNRAS, 468, 2345

14
15

https://cosmo.oca.eu/dash/
https://github.com/shergreen/SatGen/tree/sheridan

MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2021)

Drakos N. E., Taylor J. E., Benson A. J., 2020, MNRAS, 494, 378
Erkal D., Belokurov V., Bovy J., Sanders J. L., 2016, MNRAS, 463, 102
Errani R., Navarro J. F., 2020, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2011.07077
Facchinetti G., Lavalle J., Stref M., 2020, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2007.10392
Fong M., Han J., 2020, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2008.03477
Gan J., Kang X., van den Bosch F. C., Hou J., 2010, MNRAS, 408, 2201
Gao L., White S. D. M., Jenkins A., Stoehr F., Springel V., 2004, MNRAS,
355, 819
Gao L., Navarro J. F., Frenk C. S., Jenkins A., Springel V., White S. D. M.,
2012, MNRAS, 425, 2169
Garrison-Kimmel S., et al., 2017, MNRAS, 471, 1709
Ghigna S., Moore B., Governato F., Lake G., Quinn T., Stadel J., 1998,
MNRAS, 300, 146
Gill S. P. D., Knebe A., Gibson B. K., 2004, MNRAS, 351, 399
Gilman D., Birrer S., Treu T., 2020, A&A, 642, A194
Giocoli C., Tormen G., Sheth R. K., van den Bosch F. C., 2010, MNRAS,
404, 502
Golse G., Kneib J. P., 2002, A&A, 390, 821
Green S. B., van den Bosch F. C., 2019, MNRAS, 490, 2091
Green S. B., Aung H., Nagai D., van den Bosch F. C., 2020, MNRAS, 496,
2743
Griffen B. F., Ji A. P., Dooley G. A., Gómez F. A., Vogelsberger M., O’Shea
B. W., Frebel A., 2016, ApJ, 818, 10
Guo Q., White S., Li C., Boylan-Kolchin M., 2010, MNRAS, 404, 1111
Han J., Cole S., Frenk C. S., Jing Y., 2016, MNRAS, 457, 1208
Hayashi E., Navarro J. F., Taylor J. E., Stadel J., Quinn T., 2003, ApJ, 584,
541
Hayashi K., Ichikawa K., Matsumoto S., Ibe M., Ishigaki M. N., Sugai H.,
2016, MNRAS, 461, 2914
Hearin A. P., Zentner A. R., Berlind A. A., Newman J. A., 2013, MNRAS,
433, 659
Hezaveh Y. D., et al., 2016, ApJ, 823, 37
Hiroshima N., Ando S., Ishiyama T., 2018, Phys. Rev. D, 97, 123002
Jackson R. A., et al., 2021, MNRAS, 502, 1785
Jiang F., van den Bosch F. C., 2014, MNRAS, 440, 193
Jiang F., van den Bosch F. C., 2016, MNRAS, 458, 2848
Jiang F., van den Bosch F. C., 2017, MNRAS, 472, 657
Jiang L., Cole S., Sawala T., Frenk C. S., 2015, MNRAS, 448, 1674
Jiang F., Dekel A., Freundlich J., van den Bosch F. C., Green S. B., Hopkins
P. F., Benson A., Du X., 2021, MNRAS, 502, 621
Kampakoglou M., Benson A. J., 2007, MNRAS, 374, 775
Keeton C. R., Moustakas L. A., 2009, ApJ, 699, 1720
King I., 1962, AJ, 67, 471
Klypin A. A., Trujillo-Gomez S., Primack J., 2011, ApJ, 740, 102
Klypin A., Prada F., Yepes G., Heß S., Gottlöber S., 2015, MNRAS, 447,
3693
Knebe A., Arnold B., Power C., Gibson B. K., 2008, MNRAS, 386, 1029
Knebe A., et al., 2013, MNRAS, 435, 1618
Kravtsov A. V., Berlind A. A., Wechsler R. H., Klypin A. A., Gottlöber S.,
Allgood B., Primack J. R., 2004, ApJ, 609, 35
Lange J. U., van den Bosch F. C., Zentner A. R., Wang K., Villarreal A. S.,
2019, MNRAS, 487, 3112
Li Z.-Z., Zhao D.-H., Jing Y. P., Han J., Dong F.-Y., 2020, ApJ, 905, 177
Lovell M. R., Frenk C. S., Eke V. R., Jenkins A., Gao L., Theuns T., 2014,
MNRAS, 439, 300
Ludlow A. D., Navarro J. F., Springel V., Jenkins A., Frenk C. S., Helmi A.,
2009, ApJ, 692, 931
Ludlow A. D., Schaye J., Bower R., 2019, MNRAS, 488, 3663
Mansfield P., Avestruz C., 2020, MNRAS, 500, 3309
Meneghetti M., et al., 2020, Science, 369, 1347
Mo H., van den Bosch F. C., White S., 2010, Galaxy Formation and Evolution.
Cambridge University Press
Nadler E. O., Mao Y.-Y., Green G. M., Wechsler R. H., 2019, ApJ, 873, 34
Nadler E. O., et al., 2020a, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2008.00022
Nadler E. O., et al., 2020b, ApJ, 893, 48
Navarro J. F., Frenk C. S., White S. D. M., 1997, ApJ, 490, 493
Necib L., et al., 2020, Nature Astronomy, 4, 1078

The impact of artificial disruption
Newton O., Cautun M., Jenkins A., Frenk C. S., Helly J. C., 2018, MNRAS,
479, 2853
Ngan W. H. W., Carlberg R. G., 2014, ApJ, 788, 181
Ogiya G., 2018, MNRAS, 480, L106
Ogiya G., van den Bosch F. C., Hahn O., Green S. B., Miller T. B., Burkert
A., 2019, MNRAS, 485, 189
Oguri M., Lee J., 2004, MNRAS, 355, 120
Okabe N., Okura Y., Futamase T., 2010, ApJ, 713, 291
Okabe N., Futamase T., Kajisawa M., Kuroshima R., 2014, ApJ, 784, 90
Onions J., et al., 2012, MNRAS, 423, 1200
Parkinson H., Cole S., Helly J., 2008, MNRAS, 383, 557
Peñarrubia J., Benson A. J., 2005, MNRAS, 364, 977
Peñarrubia J., Navarro J. F., McConnachie A. W., 2008, ApJ, 673, 226
Peñarrubia J., Benson A. J., Walker M. G., Gilmore G., McConnachie A. W.,
Mayer L., 2010, MNRAS, 406, 1290
Pieri L., Bertone G., Branchini E., 2008, MNRAS, 384, 1627
Pullen A. R., Benson A. J., Moustakas L. A., 2014, ApJ, 792, 24
Read J. I., Wilkinson M. I., Evans N. W., Gilmore G., Kleyna J. T., 2006,
MNRAS, 367, 387
Reddick R. M., Wechsler R. H., Tinker J. L., Behroozi P. S., 2013, ApJ, 771,
30
Rico J., 2020, Galaxies, 8, 25
Rocha M., Peter A. H. G., Bullock J. S., Kaplinghat M., Garrison-Kimmel
S., Oñorbe J., Moustakas L. A., 2013, MNRAS, 430, 81
Shu Y., et al., 2015, ApJ, 803, 71
Somalwar J. J., Chang L. J., Mishra-Sharma S., Lisanti M., 2021, ApJ, 906,
57
Springel V., White S. D. M., Tormen G., Kauffmann G., 2001, MNRAS, 328,
726
Springel V., et al., 2008, MNRAS, 391, 1685
Strigari L. E., Koushiappas S. M., Bullock J. S., Kaplinghat M., 2007, Phys.
Rev. D, 75, 083526
Taffoni G., Mayer L., Colpi M., Governato F., 2003, MNRAS, 341, 434
Taylor J. E., Babul A., 2001, ApJ, 559, 716
Taylor J. E., Babul A., 2004, MNRAS, 348, 811
Tollet É., Cattaneo A., Mamon G. A., Moutard T., van den Bosch F. C., 2017,
MNRAS, 471, 4170
Tormen G., Bouchet F. R., White S. D. M., 1997, MNRAS, 286, 865
Trujillo-Gomez S., Klypin A., Primack J., Romanowsky A. J., 2011, ApJ,
742, 16
Vale A., Ostriker J. P., 2006, MNRAS, 371, 1173
Vattis K., Toomey M. W., Koushiappas S. M., 2020, arXiv e-prints, p.
arXiv:2008.11577
Vegetti S., Koopmans L. V. E., Auger M. W., Treu T., Bolton A. S., 2014,
MNRAS, 442, 2017
Vogelsberger M., Zavala J., Loeb A., 2012, MNRAS, 423, 3740
Wetzel A. R., 2011, MNRAS, 412, 49
Yang S., Du X., Benson A. J., Pullen A. R., Peter A. H. G., 2020, MNRAS,
498, 3902
Zentner A. R., Bullock J. S., 2003, ApJ, 598, 49
Zentner A. R., Berlind A. A., Bullock J. S., Kravtsov A. V., Wechsler R. H.,
2005, ApJ, 624, 505
Zentner A. R., Hearin A. P., van den Bosch F. C., 2014, MNRAS, 443, 3044
Zhao D. H., Jing Y. P., Mo H. J., Börner G., 2009, ApJ, 707, 354
van den Bosch F. C., 2017, MNRAS, 468, 885
van den Bosch F. C., Jiang F., 2016, MNRAS, 458, 2870
van den Bosch F. C., Ogiya G., 2018, MNRAS, 475, 4066
van den Bosch F. C., Yang X., Mo H. J., Norberg P., 2005a, MNRAS, 356,
1233
van den Bosch F. C., Tormen G., Giocoli C., 2005b, MNRAS, 359, 1029
van den Bosch F. C., Jiang F., Hearin A., Campbell D., Watson D., Padmanabhan N., 2014, MNRAS, 445, 1713
van den Bosch F. C., Jiang F., Campbell D., Behroozi P., 2016, MNRAS, 455,
158
van den Bosch F. C., Ogiya G., Hahn O., Burkert A., 2018, MNRAS, 474,
3043
van den Bosch F. C., Lange J. U., Zentner A. R., 2019, MNRAS, 488, 4984

17

APPENDIX A: INITIAL ORBITS
Here, we describe our approach for initializing subhalo orbits. We
specify the initial phase space coordinates of the infalling subhalo as
{𝑟, 𝜃, 𝜙, 𝑣𝑟 , 𝑣 𝜃 , 𝑣 𝜙 } = {𝑟 vir , 𝜃, 𝜙, −𝑣 cos 𝛾, 𝑣 sin 𝛾 cos 𝛿, 𝑣 sin 𝛾 sin 𝛿}.
(A1)
We assume that subhalo infall occurs isotropically, and therefore
select an initial azimuthal angle, 𝜙, uniformly from [0, 2𝜋) and an
initial polar angle, 𝜃, by sampling cos 𝜃 uniformly from [0, 1). In
order to determine the initial velocity vector, the degrees of freedom
of which are the speed, 𝑣, the angle between the velocity vector and
the (negative of the) position vector, 𝛾, and an additional angle that
sets the orientation of the orbital plane, 𝛿, we use the universal model
of Li et al. (2020), which has been calibrated using a large suite of
cosmological simulations.
For all first infall events (i.e., for a given subhalo, only considering
the first time a subhalo enters into the host virial radius) aggregated
across all of the simulations and over a wide range of redshift snapshots, Li et al. (2020) find that 𝑢 ≡ 𝑣/𝑉vir,h (here, 𝑉vir,h denotes
the instantaneous virial velocity of the host) is well-described by a
universal log-normal distribution that is peaked near unity and is
independent of subhalo mass and redshift, 𝑧:
"
#
1
ln2 (𝑢/𝜇1 ) d𝑢
𝑝(𝑢) d𝑢 = √
exp −
.
(A2)
𝑢
2𝜎 2
2𝜋𝜎1
1

Here, 𝜇1 = 1.2 and 𝜎1 = 0.2. They also find that mergers with larger
𝑀vir (instantaneous virial mass of the host) and/or 𝜉 ≡ 𝑚 acc /𝑀vir
result in more radial subhalo orbits, which is mainly attributed to
gravitational focusing. By rewriting the host mass, 𝑀vir , in terms of
its corresponding density peak height, 𝜈 ≡ 𝛿c (𝑧)/𝜎(𝑀vir ), where
𝛿c (𝑧) is the critical overdensity of collapse and 𝜎 2 (𝑀) is the mass
variance, the authors find that the distribution of infall angles is
redshift-independent and only depends on 𝑢, 𝜈, and 𝜉. Specifically,
cos2 𝛾 follows an exponential distribution,

𝜁
exp 𝜁 cos2 𝛾 d cos2 𝛾,
𝑝(cos2 𝛾 | 𝑢, 𝜈, 𝜉) d cos2 𝛾 = 𝜁
𝑒 −1
where
"
#
ln2 (𝑢/𝜇2 )
𝜁 = 𝑎 0 exp −
+ 𝐴(𝑢 + 1) + 𝐵,
2𝜎12
𝐴 = 𝑎 1 𝜈 + 𝑎 2 𝜁 𝑐 + 𝑎 3 𝜈𝜁 𝑐 , and

(A3)

(A4)

𝐵 = 𝑏0 + 𝑏1 𝜁 𝑐 ,
and the best-fit parameters are (𝑎 0 , 𝑎 1 , 𝑎 2 , 𝑎 3 , 𝑏 0 , 𝑏 1 , 𝜇2 , 𝑐) =
(0.89, 0.3, −3.33, 0.56, −1.44, 9.60, 1.04, 0.43).
We use equations (A2)–(A4) to sample the initial 𝑣 and 𝛾 for each
subhalo at infall. In order to set the orientation of the orbital plane,
we assume isotropy and therefore draw 𝛿 uniformly from [0, 2𝜋).
Using the 𝑢 distribution of Li et al. (2020) results in a substantial fraction of sampled orbits with initial orbital energies that lie
above the maximum value sampled in the DASH simulations (corresponding to 𝑥c = 2). This fraction has a slight dependence on the
host concentration. For example, for 𝑐 vir,h = 10, a total of 25% of
subhaloes have 𝑥c > 2 at infall and 2% are initially unbound (i.e.,
𝑣 at infall is larger than the escape velocity). Fortunately, the performance of our DASH-calibrated evolved subhalo density profile
model and mass-loss prescription both exhibit minimal dependence
on the orbital parameters. We emphasize that the combined impact
of dynamical friction and the growth of the host potential results in
MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2021)

18

S. B. Green, F. C. van den Bosch, and F. Jiang

continuous reduction of the subhalo orbital energy, lowering 𝑥c over
time. These effects also drive subhaloes that are initially unbound to
eventually become bound after infall; thus, we include these initially
unbound orbits in the SatGen subhalo population.
This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX file prepared by the author.

MNRAS 000, 1–18 (2021)

